RKMRAYAM 
THE GUIDE 



'The best of R.K. Narayan's enchanting novels' -New Yorker 




Penguin Books 

THE GUIDE 



R. K. Narayan was born in Madras, South India, and 
educated there and at Maharaja's College in Mysore. 
His first novel, Swami and Friends (1935), and its succes- 
sor. The Bachelor of Arts (1937), are both set in the 
enchanting fictional territory of Malgudi. Other 
'Malgudi' novels are The Dark Room (1938), The English 
Teacher (1945), Mr Sampath (1949), The Financial Expert 
(1952), Waiting for the Mahatma (1955), The Man-Eater of 
Malgudi (1961), The Vendor of Sweets (1967), The Painter 
of Signs (1976), A Tiger for Malgudi (1983), Under the 
Banyan T-'^e (1985) and Talkative Man (1986). The Guide 
(1958) won him the National Prize of the Indian Liter- 
ary Academy, his country's highest literary honour. As 
well as four other collections of short stories, A Horse 
and Two Goats, An Astrologer's Day and Other Stories, 
Lawley Road and Malgudi Days, he has published two 
travel books. My Dateless Diary and The Emerald Route; 
two volumes of essays. Next Saturday and Reluctant Guru; 
the retold legends, Gods, Demons and Others, The 
Ramayana and The Mahabharata; and a volume of 
memoirs, My Days. In 1980 he was awarded the A. C. 
Benson Medal by the Royal Society of Literature and 
in 1982 he was made an Honorary Member of the 
American Academy and Institute of Arts and Letters. 



R. K. NARAYAN 



THE GUIDE 



A NOVEL 



PENGUIN BOOKS 



Cb^risstcwn Brancn Library 
179 Main Street 
Chariestown, MA 0S1 29-3299 



PENGUIN BOOKS 

Published by the Penguin Group 

27 Wrights Lane, London \v8 5TZ, England 

Viking Penguin Inc., 40 West 23rd Street, New York, New York looio, USA 

Penguin Books Australia Ltd, Ringwood, \'ictoria, Australia 

Penguin Books Canada Ltd, 2801 John Street, Markham, Ontario, Canada L3R i 

Penguin Books (NZ) Ltd, 182-190 Wairau Road, Auckland 10, New Zealand 

Penguin Books Ltd, Registered Offices: Harmondsworth, Middlesex, England 

First published in the United States of America by The Viking Press 1958 

Published in Penguin Books in the United States of America 1980 

Reprinted 1984, 1985, 1986 

First published in the United Kingdom by William Heinemann 1980 

Published in Penguin Books in Great Britain 1988 

Reprinted 1988 



7^6/6 



o 



Copyright © R. K. Narayan, 195^ 
All rights reser\ed 



LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGUING IN PUBLICATION DATA 

Narayan, R K 1906- 

The guide. 

I. Title. 

PZ.N166GU 1980 [PR9499.3N3] 823 79-24521 

ISBN O 14 00.5453 7 

Printed and bound in Great Britain by 

Cox & Wyman Ltd, Reading 

Set in Janson 

Except in the United States of America, 

this book is sold subject to the condition 

that it shall not, by way of trade or otherwise, 

be lent, re-sold, hired out, or otherwise circulated 

without the publisher's prior consent in any form of 

binding or cover other than that in which it is 

published and without a similar condition 

including this condition being imposed 

on the subsequent purchaser 



The Guide 



Chapter One 



^xS^xS^$x$^x$^xSx$>^^x$xS^$x$x$^^ 



Raju welcomed the intrusion — something to relieve the loneli- 
ness of the place. The man stood gazing reverentially on his 
face. Raju felt amused and embarrassed. "Sit down if you like," 
Raju said, to break the spell. The other accepted the suggestion 
with a grateful nod and went down the river steps to wash 
his feet and face, came up wiping himself dry with the end of 
a checkered yellow towel on his shoulder, and took his seat two 
steps below the granite slab on which Raju was sitting cross- 
legged as if it were a throne, beside an ancient shrine. The 
branches of the trees canopying the river course rustled and 
trembled with the agitation of birds and monkeys settling 
down for the night. Upstream beyond the hills the sun was 
setting. Raju waited for the other to say something. But he was 
too polite to open a conversation. 

Raju asked, "Where are you from?" dreading lest the other 
should turn around and ask the same question. 

The man replied, "Fm from Mangal — " 

"Where is Mangal?" 

The other waved his arm, indicating a direction across the 
river, beyond the high steep bank. "Not far from here," he 
added. The man volunteered further information about him- 
self. "My daughter lives nearby. I had gone to visit her; I am 
now on my way home. I left her after food. She insisted that 
I should stay on to dinner, but I refused. It'd have meant 
walking home at nearly midnight. I'm not afraid of anything, 

3 



but why should we walk when we ought to be sleeping in 
bed?" 

"You are very sensible," Raju said. 

They listened for a while to the chatter of monkeys, and the 
man added as an afterthought, "My daughter is married to my 
own sister's son, and so there is no problem. I often visit my 
sister and also my daughter; and so no one minds it." 

"Why should anyone mind in any case if you visit a daugh- 
ter?" 

"It's not considered proper form to pay too many visits to a 
son-in-law," explained the villager. 

Raju Uked this rambUng talk. He had been all alone in this 
place for over a day. It was good to hear the human voice 
again. After this the villager resumed the study of his face with 
intense respect. And Raju stroked his chin thoughtfully to 
make sure that an apostolic beard had not suddenly grown 
there. It was still smooth. He had had his last shave only two 
days before and paid for it with the hard-earned coins of his 
jail life. 

Loquacious as usual and with the sharp blade scraping the 
soap, the barber had asked, "Coming out, I suppose?" Raju 
rolled his eyes and remained silent. He felt irritated at the ques- 
tion, but did not like to show it with the fellow holding the 
knife. "Just coming out?" repeated the barber obstinately. 

Raju felt it would be no use being angry with such a man. 
Here he was in the presence of experience. He asked, "How do 
you know?" 

"I have spent twenty years shaving people here. Didn*t you 
observe that this was the first shop as you left the jail gate? 
Half the trick is to have your business in the right place. But 
that raises other people's jealousies!" he said, waving off an 
army of jealous barbers. 

"Don't you attend to the inmates?" 

4 



"Not until they come out. It is my brother's son who is on 
duty there. I don't want to compete with him and I don't 
want to enter the jail gates every day." 

"Not a bad place," said Raju through the soap. 

"Go back then," said the barber and asked, "What was it? 
What did the police say?" 

"Don't talk of it," snapped Raju and tried to maintain a 
sullen, forbidding silence for the rest of the shave. 

But the barber was not to be cowed so easily. His lifelong 
contact with tough men had hai-dened him. He said, "Eighteen 
months or twenty-four? I can bet it's one or the other." 

Raju felt admiration for the man. He was a master. It was 
no use losing one's temper. "You are so wise and knowing. 
Why do you ask questions?" 

The barber was pleased with the compliment. His fingers 
paused in their operations; he bent round to face Raju and 
say, "Just to get it out of you, that is all. It's written on your 
face that you are a two-year sort, which means you are not a 
murderer." 

"How can you tell?" Raju said. 

"You would look different if you had been in for seven 
years, which is what one gets for murder only half-proved." 

"What else have I not done?" Raju asked. 

"You have not cheated in any big way; but perhaps only in 
a small, petty manner." 

"Go on. What next?" 

"You have not abducted or raped anyone, or set fire to a 
house." 

"Why don't you say exactly why I was sent to jail for two 
years? I'll give you four annas for a guess." 

"No time now for a game," said the barber and went on, 
"What do you do next?" 

"I don't know. Must go somewhere, I suppose," said Raju 
thoughtfully. 



"In case you like to go back to your old company, why 
don't you put your hand in someone's pocket at the market, 
or walk through an open door and pick out some trash and 
let the people howl for the police? They'll see you back where 
you want to be." 

"Not a bad place," Raju repeated, slightly nodding in the 
direction of the jail wall. "Friendly people there — but I hate 
to be awakened every morning at five." 

"An hour at which a night-prowler likes to return home to 
bed, I suppose," said the barber with heavy insinuation. "Well, 
that's all. You may get up," he said, putting away the razor. 
"You look like a maharaja now" — surveying Raju at a distance 
from his chair. 

The villager on the lower step looked up at his face with 
devotion, which irked Raju. "Why do you look at me like 
that?" he asked brusquely. 

The man replied, "I don't know. I don't mean to offend 
you, sir." Raju wanted to blurt out, "I am here because I have 
nowhere else to go. I want to be away from people who may 
recognize me." But he hesitated, wondering how he should 
say it. It looked as though he would be hurting the other's 
deepest sentiment if he so much as whispered the word "jail." 
He tried at least to say, "I am not so great as you imagine. I 
am just ordinary." Before he could fumble and reach the 
words, the other said, "I have a problem, sir." 

"Tell me about it," Raju said, the old, old habit of affording 
guidance to others asserting itself. Tourists who recommended 
him to one another would say at one time, "If you are lucky 
enough to be guided by Raju, you will know everything. He 
will not only show you all the wonh-while places, but also 
help you in every way." It was in his nature to get involved in 
other people's interests and activities. "Otherwise," Raju often 
reflected, "I should have grown up like a thousand other 
normal persons, without worries in life." 
6 



I 



My troubles would not have started (Raju said in the course 
of narrating his life-story to this man who was called Velan 
at a later stage) but for Rosie. Why did she call herself Rosie? 
She did not come from a foreign land. She was just an Indian, 
who should have done well with Devi, Meena, Lalitha, or any 
one of the thousand names we have in our country. She chose 
to call herself Rosie. Don't imagine on hearing her name that 
she wore a short skirt or cropped her hair. She looked just the 
orthodox dancer that she was. She wore saris of bright hues 
and gold lace, had curly hair which she braided and beflowered, 
wore diamond earrings and a heavy gold necklace. I told her 
at the first opportunity what a great dancer she was, and how 
she fostered our cultural traditions, and it pleased her. 

Thousands of persons must have said the same thing to her 
since, but I happened to be the first in the line. Anyone likes 
to hear flattering sentiments, and more than others, I suppose, 
dancers. They like to be told every hour of the day how well 
they keep their steps. I praised her art whenever I could snatch 
a moment alone with her and whisper in her ear, out of range 
of that husband of hers. Oh, what a man! I have not met a 
more grotesque creature in my life. Instead of calling herself 
Rosie, she could more logically have called him Marco Polo. 
He dressed like a man about to undertake an expedition — 
with his thick colored glasses, thick jacket, and a thick helmet 
over which was perpetually stretched a green, shiny water- 
proof cover, giving him the appearance of a space traveler. I 
have, of course, no idea of the original Marco Polo's appear- 
ance, but I wanted to call this man Marco at first sight, and I 
have not bothered to associate him with any other name 
since. 

The moment I set eyes on him, on that memorable day at 
our railway station, I knew that here was a lifelong customer 
for me. A man who preferred to dress like a permanent tourist 
was just what a guide passionately looked for all his life. 

You may want to ask why I became a guide or when. I was 



a guide for the same reason as someone else is a signaler, porter, 
or guard. It is fated thus. Don't laugh at my railway associ- 
ations. The railways got into my blood very early in life. 
Engines with their tremendous clanging and smoke ensnared 
my senses. I felt at home on the railway platform, and con- 
sidered the stationmaster and porter the best company for man, 
and their railway talk the most enlightened. I grew up in their 
midst. Ours was a small house opposite the Malgudi station. 
The house had been built by my father with his own hands 
long before trains were thought of. He chose this spot because 
it was outside the town and he could have it cheap. He had 
dug the earth, kneaded the mud with water from the well, and 
built the walls, and roofed them with coconut thatch. He 
planted papaya trees around, which yielded fruit, which he cut 
up and sold in slices — a single fruit brought him eight annas 
if he carved it with dexterity. My father had a small shop built 
of deal wood planks and gunny sack; and all day he sat there 
selling peppermint, fruit, tobacco, betel leaf, parched gram 
(which he measured out of tiny bamboo cylinders), and what- 
ever else the wayfarers on the Trunk Road demanded. It was 
known as the "hut shop." A crowd of peasants and drivers of 
bullock wagons were always gathered in front of his shop. A 
very busy man indeed. At midday he called i^e when he went 
in for his lunch and made a routine statement at the same hour. 
"Raju, take my seat. Be sure to receive the money for what- 
ever you give. Don't eat off all that eating stuff, it's kept for 
sale; call me if you have doubts.'* 

And I kept calling aloud, "Father, green peppermints, how 
many for half an anna?" while the customer waited patiently. 

"Three," he shouted from the house, with his mouth stuffed 
with food. "But if he is buying for three-quarters of an anna, 
give him . . ." He mentioned some complicated concession, 
which I could never apply. 

I appealed to the customer, "Give me only half an anna," 
and gave him three peppermints in return. If by chance I had 
8 



happened to take four greens out of the big bottle, I swallowed 
the fourth in order to minimize complications. 

An eccentric cockerel in the neighborhood announced the 
daybreak when it probably felt that we had slept long enough. 
It let out a shattering cry which made my father jump from 
his bed and wake me up. 

I washed myself at the wall, smeared holy ash on my fore- 
head, stood before the framed pictures of gods hanging high 
up on the wall, and recited all kinds of sacred verse in a loud, 
ringing tone. After watching my performance for a while, my 
father slipped away to the back yard to milk the buffalo. Later, 
coming in with the pail, he always remarked, "Something 
really wrong with that animal this time. She wouldn't yield 
even half a measure today." 

My mother invariably answered, "I know, I know. She is 
getting wrong-headed, that is all. I know what she will respond 
to," she said in a mysterious, sinister manner, receiving the 
pail and carrying it into the kitchen. She came out in a moment 
with a tumblerful of hot milk for me. 

The sugar was kept in an old tin can, which looked rusty 
but contained excellent sugar. It was kept on a wooden ledge 
on the smoke-stained wall of the kitchen, out of my reach. I 
fear that its position was shifted up and up as I grew older, 
because I remember that I could never get at that rusty can at 
any time except with the cooperation of my elders. 

When the sky lightened, my father was ready for me on the 
pyol. There he sat with a thin broken twig at his side. The 
modern notions of child psychology were unknown then; the 
stick was an educator's indispensable equipment. "The unbeaten 
brat will remain unlearned," said my father, quoting an old 
proverb. He taught me the Tamil alphabet. He wrote the first 
two letters on each side of my slate at a time. I had to go over 
the contours of the letters with my pencil endlessly until they 
became bloated and distorted beyond recognition. From time 
to time my father snatched the slate from my hand, looked at 

9 



it, glared at me, and said, "What a mess! You will never prosper 
in life if you disfigure the sacred letters of the alphabet." Then 
he cleaned the slate with his damp towel, wrote the letters 
again, and gave it to me with the injunction, "If you spoil this, 
you will make me wild. Trace them exactly as I have written. 
Don't try any of your tricks on them," and he flourished his 
twig menacingly. 

I said meekly, "Yes, father," and started to write again. I can 
well picture myself, sticking my tongue out, screwing my head 
to one side, and putting my entire body-weight on the pencil 
— the slate pencil screeched as I tried to drive it through and 
my father ordered, "Don't make all that noise with that horrible 
pencil of yours. What has come over you?" 

Then followed arithmetic. Two and two, four; four and 
three, something else. Something into something, more; some 
more into less. Oh, God, numbers did give me a headache. 
While the birds were out chirping and flying in the cool air, 
I cursed the fate that confined me to my father's company. His 
temper was rising every second. As if in answer to my silent 
prayer, an early customer was noticed at the door of the hut 
shop and my lessons came to an abrupt end. My father left me 
with the remark, "I have better things to do of a morning than 
make a genius out of a clay-head." 

Although the lessons had seemed interminable to me, my 
mother said the moment she saw me, "So you have been let 
oflF! I wonder what you can learn in half an hour!" 

I told her, "I'll go out and play and won't trouble you. But 
no more lessons for the day, please." With that I was off to 
the shade of a tamarind tree across the road. It was an ancient, 
spreading tree, dense with leaves, amidst which monkeys and 
birds lived, bred, and chattered incessantly, feeding on the 
tender leaves and fruits. Pigs and piglets came from somewhere 
and nosed about the ground thick with fallen leaves, and I 
played there all day. I think I involved the pigs in some imag- 
inary game and even fancied myself carried on their backs. My 

lO 



father's customers greeted me as they passed that way. I had 
marbles, an iron hoop to roll, and a rubber ball, with which I 
occupied myself. I hardly knew what time of the day it was or 
what was happening around me. 

Sometimes my father took me along to the town when he 
went shopping. He stopped a passing bullock cart for the trip. I 
hung about anxiously with an appealing look in my eyes (I had 
been taught not to ask to be taken along) until my father said, 
"Climb in, little man." I clambered in before his sentence was 
completed. The bells around the bull's neck jingled, the wooden 
wheels grated and ground the dust off the rough road; I clung 
to the staves on the sides and felt my bones shaken. Still, I 
enjoyed the smell of the straw in the cart and all the scenes we 
passed. Men and vehicles, hogs and boys — the panorama of life 
enchanted me. 

At the market my father made me sit on a wooden platform 
within sight of a shopman known to him, and went about to 
do his shopping. My pockets would be filled with fried nuts 
and sweets; munching, I watched the activities of the market — 
people buying and selling, arguing and laughing, swearing and 
shouting. While my father was gone on his shopping expedi- 
tion, I remember, a question kept drumming in my head: 
"Father, you are a shopkeeper yourself. Why do you go about 
buying in other shops?" I never got an answer. As I sat gazing 
on the afternoon haze, the continuous din of the marketplace 
lulled my senses, the dusty glare suddenly made me drowsy, 
and I fell asleep, leaning on the wall of that unknown place 
where my father had chosen to put me, 

"I have a problem, sir," said the man. 

Raju nodded his head and added, "So has everyone," in a 
sudden access of pontificality. Ever since the moment this man 
had come and sat before him, gazing on his face, he had ex- 
perienced a feeling of importance. He felt like an actor who 
was always expected to utter the right sentence. Now the 

II 



appropriate sentence was "If you show me a person without a 
problem, then V\\ show you the perfect world. Do you know 
what the great Buddha said?" The other edged nearer. "A 
woman once went wailing to the great Buddha, clasping her 
dead baby to her bosom. The Buddha said, *Go into every home 
in this city and find one where death is unknown; if you find 
such a place, fetch me a handful of mustard from there, and 
then I'll teach you how to conquer death.' " 

The man clicked his tongue in appreciation and asked, "And 
what happened to the dead baby, sir?" 

"She had to bury it, of course," said Raju. "So also," he con- 
cluded, while doubting in his mind the relevance of the com- 
parison, "if you show me a single home without a problem, 
I shall show you the way to attain a universal solution to all 
problems." 

The man was overwhelmed by the weightiness of this state- 
ment. He performed a deep obeisance and said, "I have not 
told you my name, sir. I am Velan. My father in his lifetime- 
married thrice. I am the first son of his first wife. The youngest 
daughter of his last wife is also with us. As the head of the 
family, I have given her every comfort at home, provided her 
with all the jewelry and clothes a girl needs, but . . ." He 
paused slightly before bringing out the big surprise. But Raju 
completed the sentence for him, "The girl shows no gratitude." 

"Absolutely, sir!" said the man. 

"And she will not accept your plans for her marriage?" 

"Oh, too true, sir," Velan said, wonderstruck. "My cousin's 
son is a fine boy. Even the date of the wedding was fixed, but 
do you know, sir, what the girl did?" 

"Ran away from the whole thing," said Raju, and asked, 
"How did you bring her back?" 

"I searched for her three days and nights and spotted her in 
a festival crowd in a distant village. They were pulling the 
temple chariot around the streets and the population of fifty 
villages was crowded into one. I searched every face in the 

12 



crowd and at last caught her while she was watching a puppet 
show. Now, do you know what she does?" Raju decided to 
let the other have the satisfaction of saying things himself, and 
Velan ended his story with, "She sulks in a room all day. I do 
not know what to do. It is possible that she is possessed. If I 
could know what to do with her, it'd be such a help, sir." 

Raju said with a philosophic weariness, "Such things are 
common in life. One should not let oneself be bothered un- 
duly by anything." 

"What am I to do with her, sir?" 

"Bring her over; let me speak to her," Raju said grandly. 

Velan rose, bowed low, and tried to touch Raju's feet. Raju 
recoiled at the attempt. "I'll not permit anyone to do this. God 
alone is entitled to such a prostration. He will destroy us if we 
attempt to usurp His rights." He felt he was attaining the 
stature of a saint. Velan went down the steps meekly, crossed 
the river, climbed the opposite bank, and was soon out of sight. 
Raju ruminated. "I wish I had asked him what the age of the 
girl was. Hope she is uninteresting. I have had enough trouble 
in life." 

He sat there for a long time, watching the river flow into the 
night; the rustle of the peepul and banyan trees around was 
sometimes loud and frightening. The sky was clear. Having 
nothing else to do, he started counting the stars. He said to 
himself, "I shall be rewarded for this profound service to 
humanity. People will say, *Here is the man who knows the 
exact number of stars in the sky. If you have any trouble on 
that account, you had better consult him. He will be your 
night guide for the skies.' " He told himself, "The thing to do 
is to start from a corner and go on patch by patch. Never work 
from the top to the horizon, but always the other way." He 
was evolving a theory. He started the count from above a 
fringe of Palmyra trees on his left-hand side, up the course of 
the river, over to the other side. "One . . . two . . . fifty- 
five . . ." He suddenly realized that if he looked deeper a new 

13 



cluster of stars came into view; by the time he assimilated it 
into his reckoning, he realized he had lost sight of his starting 
point and found himself entangled in hopeless figures. He felt 
exhausted. He stretched himself on the stone slab and fell 
asleep under the open sky. 

The eight-o'clock sun shone fully on his face. He opened his 
eyes and saw Velan standing respectfully away on a lower 
step. "I have brought my sister," he said and thrust up a young 
girl of founeen, who had tightly braided her hair and decorated 
herself with jewelry. Velan explained, "These jewels were 
given by me, bought out of my own money, for she is after 
all my sister." 

Raju sat up, rubbing his eyes. He was as yet unprepared to 
take charge of the world's affairs. His immediate need was 
privacy for his morning ablutions. He said to them, "You may 
go in there and wait for me." 

He found them waiting for him in the ancient pillared hall. 
Raju sat himself down on a slightly elevated platform in the 
middle of the hall. Velan placed before him a basket filled with 
bananas, cucumbers, pieces of sugar cane, fried nuts, and a 
copper vessel brimming with milk. 

Raju asked, "What is all this for?" 

"It will please us very much if you will accept them, sir." 

Raju sat looking at the hamper. It was not unwelcome. He 
could eat anything and digest it now. He had learned not to be 
fussy. Formerly he would have said, "Who will eat this? Give 
me coffee and idliy please, first thing in the day. These are good 
enough for munching later." But prison Hfe had trained him 
to swallow anything at any rime. Sometimes a colleague in the 
cell, managing to smuggle in, through the kindness of a warder, 
something unpalatable like mutton-puff made six days ago, with 
its oil going rancid, shared it with Raju, and Raju remembered 
how he ate it with gusto at three in the morning — a time chosen 
before the others could wake up and claim a share. Anything 

H 



was welcome now. He asked, "Why do you do all this for 
me?" 

"They are grown in our fields and we are proud to oflFer 
them to you." 

Raju did not have to ask further questions. He had gradually 
come to view himself as a master of these occasions. He had 
already begun to feel that the adulation directed to him was 
inevitable. He sat in silence, eying the gift for a while. Sud- 
denly he picked up the basket and went into an inner sanctum. 
The others followed. Raju stopped before a stone image in the 
dark recess. It was a tall god with four hands, bearing a mace 
and wheel, with a beautifully chiseled head, but abandoned a 
century ago. Raju ceremoniously placed the basket of edibles 
at the feet of the image and said, "It's His first. Let the offering 
go to Him, first; and we will eat the remnant. By giving to 
God, do you know how it multiples, rather than divides? Do 
you know the story?" He began narrating the story of Devaka, 
a man of ancient times who begged for alms at the temple gate 
every day and would not use any of his collections without 
first putting them at the feet of the god. Halfway through the 
story he realized that he could not remember either its course 
or its purport. He lapsed into silence. Velan patiently waited 
for the continuation. He was of the stuff disciples are made of; 
an unfinished story or an incomplete moral never bothered 
him; it was all in the scheme of life. When Raju turned and 
strode majestically back to the river step, Velan and his sister 
followed him mutely. 

How could I recollect the story heard from my mother so 
long ago? She told me a story every evening while we waited 
for Father to close the shop and come home. The shop re- 
mained open till midnight. Bullock carts in long caravans ar- 
rived late in the evening from distant villages, loaded with 
coconut, rice, and other commodities for the market. The 
animals were unyoked under the big tamarind tree for the 

15 



night, and the cartmen drifted in twos and threes to the shop, 
for a chat or to ask for things to eat or smoke. How my father 
loved to discuss with them the price of grain, rainfall, harvest, 
and the state of irrigation channels. Or they talked about old 
litigations. One heard repeated references to magistrates, af- 
fidavits, witnesses in the case, and appeals, puncniated with 
roars of laughter — possibly the memory of some absurd legality 
or loophole tickled them. 

My father ignored food and sleep when he had company. 
My mother sent me out several times to see if he could be 
made to turn in. He was a man of uncertain temper and one 
could not really guess how he would react to interruptions, 
and so my mother coached me to go up, watch his mood, and 
gently remind him of food and home. I stood under the shop 
awning, coughing and clearing my throat, hoping to catch his 
eye. But the talk was all-absorbing and he would not glance in 
my direction, and I got absorbed in their talk, although I did 
not understand a word of it. 

After a while my mother's voice came gently on the night 
air, calling, "Raju, Raju," and my father interrupted his ac- 
tivities to look at me and say, "Tell your mother not to wait 
for me. Tell her to place a handful of rice and buttermilk in 
a bowl, with just one piece of lime pickle, and keep it in the 
oven for me. I'll come in later." It was almost a formula with 
him five days in a week. He always added, "Not that I'm 
really hungry tonight." And then I believe he went on to dis- 
cuss health problems with his cronies. 

But I didn't stop to hear further. I made a swift dash back 
home. There was a dark patch between the light from the 
shop and the dim lantern shedding its light on our threshold, 
a matter of about ten yards, I suppose, but the passage through 
it gave me a cold sweat. I expected wild animals and super- 
natural creatures to emerge and grab me. My mother waited 
on the doorstep to receive me and said, "Not hungry, I sup- 
pose! That'll give him an excuse to talk to the village folk all 
i6 



night, and then come in for an hour's sleep and get up with 
the crowing of that foolish cock somewhere. He will spoil his 
health." 

I followed her into the kitchen. She placed my plate and 
hers side by side on the floor, drew the rice-pot within reach, 
and served me and herself simultaneously, and we finished our 
dinner by the sooty tin lamp stuck on a nail in the wall. She 
unrolled a mat for me in the front room, and I lay down to 
sleep. She sat at my side, awaiting Father's return. Her presence 
gave me a feeling of inexplicable coziness. I felt I ought to 
put her proximity to good use, and complained, ''Something is 
bothering my hair," and she ran her fingers through my hair 
and scratched the nape of my neck. And then I commanded, 
"A story." 

Immediately she began, "Once upon a time there was a man 
called Devaka ..." I heard his name mentioned almost every 
night. He was a hero, saint, or something of the kind. I never 
learned fully what he did or why, sleep overcoming me before 
my mother was through even the preamble. 

Raju sat on the step and watched the river dazzling in the 
morning sun. The air was cool, and he wished he were alone. 
His visitors sat patiently on a lower step, waiting for him to 
attend to them, like patients in a doctor's room. Raju had 
many problems of his own to think of. He suddenly felt ir- 
ritated at the responsibility that Velan was thrusting on him, 
and said frankly, "I am not going to think of your problems, 
Velan; not now." 

"May I know why?" he asked humbly. 

"It is so," Raju said with an air of finality. 

"When may I trouble you, sir?" he asked. 

Raju replied grandly, "When the time is ripe for it." This 
took the matter from the realms of time into eternity. Velan 
accepted his answer with resignation and rose to go. It was 
rather touching. Raju felt indebted to him for the edibles he 

17 



had brought, so he said pacifyingly, "Is this the sister you told 
me about?" 

"Yes, sir; it is." 

"I know what your problem is, but I wish to give the matter 
some thought. We cannot force vital solutions. Every question 
must bide its time. Do you understand?" 

"Yes, sir," Velan said. He drew his fingers across his brow 
and said, "Whatever is written here will happen. How can we 
ever help it?" 

"We may not change it, but we may understand it," Raju 
replied grandly. "And to arrive at a proper understanding, 
time is needed." Raju felt he was growing wings. Shortly, he 
felt, he might float in the air and perch himself on the tower 
of the ancient temple. Nothing was going to surprise him. He 
suddenly found himself asking, "Have I been in a prison or in 
some sort of transmigration?" 

Velan looked relieved and proud to hear so much from his 
master. He looked significantly at his difficult sister, and she 
bowed her head in shame. Raju declared, fixedly looking at the 
girl, "What must happen must happen; no power on earth or 
in heaven can change its course, just as no one can change the 
course of that river." They gazed on the river, as if the clue to 
their problems lay there, and turned to go. Raju watched them 
cross the river and climb the opposite bank. Soon they were 
out of sight. 



i8 



Chapter Two 



^^^>^<$KSx$K$>^^^^X^^^$^^y^^^ 



We noticed much activity in the field in front of our house. 
A set of men arrived from the town every morning and were 
busy in the field all day. We learned that they were building 
a railway track. They came to my father's shop for refresh- 
ments. My father inquired anxiously, "When shall we have the 
trains coming in here?" 

If they were in a good mood, they answered, "About six 
or eight months, who can say?" Or if they were in a black 
mood, "Don't ask us. Next you will tell us to drive a loco- 
motive to your shop!" and they laughed grimly. 

Work was going on briskly. I lost to some extent my free- 
dom under the tamarind tree, because trucks were parked 
there. I climbed into them and played. No one minded me. 
All day I was climbing in and out of the trucks, and my clothes 
became red with mud. Most of the trucks brought red earth 
which was banked up on the field. In a short while a small 
mountain was raised in front of our house. It was enchanting. 
When I stood on the top of this mound I could see far-off 
places, the hazy outlines of Mempi Hills. I became as busy as 
the men. I spent all my time in the company of those working 
on the track, listening to their talk and sharing their jokes. 
More trucks came, bringing timber and iron. A variety of 
goods was piling up on every side. Presently I began to collect 
sawn-off metal bits, nuts and bolts, and I treasured them in my 

19 



mother's big trunk, where a space was allotted to me amidst 
her ancient silk saris, which she never wore. 

A boy grazing his cows approached the spot just below the 
mound on which I was playing a game by myself. His cows 
were munching the grass right below the mound, on which the 
men were working, and the little fellow had dared to step on 
the slope where I played. I was beginning to have a sense of 
ownership of the railway, and I didn't want trespassers there. 
I frowned at the boy and barked, "Get out." 

"Why?" he asked. "My cows are here, Fm watching them." 

"Begone with your cows," I said. "Otherwise they will be 
run over by the train, which will be here shortly." 

"Let them be. What do you care?" he said, which irritated 
me so much that I let out a yell and pounced on him with 
"You son of a . . ." and a variety of other expressions recently 
picked up. The boy, instead of knocking me down, ran scream- 
ing to my father. "Your son is using bad language." 

My father sprang up on hearing this. Just my misfortune. He 
came rushing toward me as I was resuming my game and 
asked, "What did you call this boy?" I had the good sense not 
to repeat it. I blinked, wordlessly, at which the boy repeated 
exactly what I had said. This produced an unexpectedly violent 
effect on my father. He grabbed my neck within the hollow 
of his hand, and asked, "Where did you pick that up?" I 
pointed at the men working on the track. He looked up, re- 
mained silent for a second, and said, "Oh, that is so, is it? You 
will not idle about picking up bad words any more. I will see 
to it. You will go to a school tomorrow and every day." 

"Father!" I cried. He was passing a harsh sentence on me. 
To be removed from a place I loved to a place I loathed! 

A tremendous fuss was made before I started for my school 
each day. My mother fed me early and filled up a little alu- 
minum vessel with refreshment for the afternoon. She carefully 
20 



put my books and slate into a bag and slung it across my 
shoulder. I was dressed in clean shorts and shirt; my hair was 
combed back from the forehead, with all the curls falling on 
my nape. For the first few days I enjoyed all this attention, 
but soon developed a normal aversion; I preferred to be neg- 
lected and stay at home to being fussed over and sent to a 
school. But my father was a stern disciplinarian; perhaps he was 
a snob who wanted to brag before others that his son was 
going to a school. He kept an eye on my movements till I 
was safely on the road each morning. He sat in his shop and 
kept calling every few minutes, "Boy, have you left?" 

I walked endlessly to reach my school. No other boy went 
in my direction. I talked to myself on the way, paused to 
observe the passers-by or a country cart lumbering along, or 
a grasshopper going under a culvert. My progress was so halt- 
ing and slow that when I turned into the Market Street I could 
hear my classmates shouting their lessons in unison, for the old 
man, our master, who taught us, believed in getting the maxi- 
mum noise out of his pupils. 

I don't know on whose advice my father chose to send me 
here for my education, while the fashionable Albert Mission 
School was quite close by. I'd have felt proud to call myself 
an Albert Mission boy. But I often heard my father declare, 
"I don't want to send my boy there; it seems they try to con- 
vert our boys into Christians and are all the time insulting our 
gods." I don't know how he got the notion; anyway, he was 
firmly convinced that the school where I was sent was the best 
under the sun. He was known to boast, "Many students who 
have passed through the hands of this ancient master are now 
big officials at Madras, collectors and men like that. . . ." It 
was purely his own imagining or the invention of the old man 
who taught me. No one could dream that this was ia any sense 
a school, let alone an outstanding school. It was what was called 
a pyol school, because the classes were held on the pyol of the 
gentleman's house. He lived in Kabir Lane, in a narrow old 

21 



house with a cement pyol in front, with the street drain run- 
ning right below it. He gathered a score of young boys of my 
age every morning on the pyol, reclined on a cushion in a 
comer, and shouted at the little fellows, flourishing a rattan 
cane all the time. All the classes were held there at the same 
time, and he bestowed attention on each group in turn. I be- 
longed to the youngest and most elementary set, just learning 
the alphabet and numbers. He made us read aloud from our 
books and copy down the letters on our slates, and looked 
through each and gave corrections and flicks from the cane for 
those who repeated their follies. He was a very abusive man. 
My father, who wanted to save me from the language of the 
railway trackmen, had certainly not made a safer choice in 
sending me to this old man, who habitually addressed his pupils 
as donkeys and traced their genealogies on either side with 
thoroughness. 

The thing that irritated him was not merely the mistakes that 
we made but our very presence. Seeing us, such short, clumsy 
youngsters, always fumbling and shuflling, I think got on his 
nerves. Of course, we made a lot of noise on his pyol. When 
he went into his house for a moment's nap or for his food or 
for any of a dozen domestic calls, we rolled over each other, 
fought, scratched, bleated, and yelled. Or we tried to invade 
his privacy and peep in. Once we slipped in and passed from 
room to room until we came to the kitchen and saw him sit- 
ting before the oven, baking something. We stood at the 
doorway and said, "Oh, master, you know how to cook also!" 
and giggled, and a lady who was standing nearby also giggled 
at our remark. 

He turned on us fiercely and ordered, "Get out, boys; don't 
come here; this is not your classroom," and we scampered back 
to our place, where he found us later and twisted our ears until 
we screamed. He said, "I am admitting you devils here because 
I want you to become civilized, but what you do is . . ." and 
he catalogued our sins and misdeeds. 

22 



We were contrite, and he softened and said, "Hereafter let 
me not catch you anywhere beyond that threshold. I will hand 
you over to the police if you come in." That settled it. We 
never peeped in again, but when his back was turned confined 
our attention to the drain that flowed beneath the pyol. We tore 
off loose leaves from our notebooks, made boats, and floated 
them down the drain, and in a short while it became an estab- 
lished practice, and a kind of boat-racing developed out of it; 
we lay on our bellies and watched the boats float away on the 
drainwater. He warned us, "If you fall off into the gutter, you 
will find yourselves in the Sarayu River, remember, and I shall 
have to tell your father to go out and look for you there, I 
suppose!" and he laughed at the grim prospect. 

His interest in us was one rupee a month and anything else 
in kind we cared to carry. My father sent him every month 
two cubes of jaggery, others brought in rice and vegetables 
and anything else he might demand from time to time. When- 
ever his store at home ran out, he called one or another to his 
side and said, "Now if you are a good boy, you will run to 
your house and fetch me just a little, only so much, mind you, 
of sugar. Come, let me see if you are smart!" He adopted a 
kindly, canvassing tone on such occasions, and we felt honored 
to be able to serve him, and pestered our parents to give us 
the gifts and fought for the honor of serving him. Our parents 
showed an excessive readiness to oblige this master, grateful 
probably because he kept us in his charge for the major part 
of the day, from morning till four in the afternoon, when he 
dismissed us and we sprinted homeward. 

In spite of all the apparent violence and purposelessness, I 
suppose we did make good under our master, for within a 
year I proved good enough for the first standard in Board 
High School; I could read heavier books, and do multiplica- 
tion up to twenty in my head. The old master himself escorted 
me to the Board School, which had just established itself, and 
admitted me there; he saw me off in my new class, seated me 

n 



and two others, and blessed us before taking leave of us. It was 
a pleasant surprise for us that he could be so kind. 

Velan was bursting with news of a miracle. He stood before 
Raju with folded hands, and said, "Sir, things have turned 
out well." 

"Fm so happy — how?" 

"My sister came before our family gathering and admitted 
her follies. She has agreed . . ." He went on to explain. The 
girl had all of a sudden appeared before the assembled family 
that morning. She faced everyone straight and said, "I have 
behaved foolishly all these days. I will do what my brother 
and the other elders at home tell me to do. They know what 
is best for us." 

"I could hardly believe my ears," explained Velan. "I pinched 
myself to see whether I was dreaming or awake. This girl's 
affair had cast a gloom on our home. If you left out our parti- 
tion suit and all the complications arising from it, we had no 
worry to equal this. You see, we are fond of the girl, and it 
pained us to watch her sulk in a dark room, without minding 
her appearance or dress or caring for food. We did our best 
to make her cheerful and then had to leave her alone. We had 
all been very miserable on account of her, and so we were 
surprised this morning when she came before us with her hair 
oiled and braided, with flowers in it. Looking bright, she said, 
1 have been a bother to you all these days. Forgive me, all of 
you. I shall do whatever my elders order me to do." Naturally, 
after we got over the surprise, we asked, 'Are you prepared to 
marry your cousin?' She did not answer at once, but stood 
with bowed head. My wife took her aside and asked whether 
we might send word to the other family, and she agreed. We 
have sent the happy message around, and there will soon be 
a marriage in our house. I have money, jewelry, and everything 
ready. I will call the pipers and drummers tomorrow morning 
and get through it all quickly. I have consulted the astrologer 

24 



already, and he says that this is an auspicious time. I do not 
want to delay even for a second the happy event." 

"For fear that she may change her mind once again?" Raju 
asked. He knew why Velan was rushing it through at this 
pace. It was easy to guess why. But the remark threw the other 
into a fit of admiration, and he asked, "How did you know 
what I had in mind, sir?" 

Raju remained silent. He could not open his lips without 
provoking admiration. This was a dangerous state of affairs. 
He was in a mood to debunk himself a little. He told Velan 
sharply, "There is nothing extraordinary in my guess," and 
promptly came the reply, "Not for you to say that, sir. Things 
may look easy enough for a giant, but ordinary poor mortals 
like us can never know what goes on in other people's minds." 

To divert his attention, Raju simply asked, "Have you any 
idea of the views of the bridegroom? Is he ready for you? 
What does he think of her refusal?" 

"After the girl came round, I sent our priest to discuss it 
with him, and he has come back to say that the boy is willing. 
He prefers not to think of what is gone. What is gone is gone." 

"True, true," Raju said, having nothing else to say and not 
wishing to utter anything that might seem too brilliant. He 
was beginning to dread his own smartness nowadays. He was 
afraid to open his lips. A vow of silence was indicated, but 
there was greater danger in silence. 

All this prudence did not save him. Velan's affairs were 
satisfactorily ended. One day he came to invite Raju to his 
sister's marriage, and Raju had to plead long and hard before 
he could make him leave him alone. However, Velan brought 
him fruit on huge trays covered with silk cloth, the sort of 
offering which Raju would conjure iip for the edification of 
his tourists when he took them through an ancient palace or 
hall. He accepted the gift gracefully. 

He avoided the girl's marriage. He did not want to be seen 
in a crowd, and he did not want to gather a crowd around 

25 



him as a man who had worked a change in an obstinate girl. 
But his aloofness did not save him. If he would not go to the 
wedding, the wedding was bound to come to him. At the 
earliest possible moment Velan brought the girl and her hus- 
band and a huge concourse of relatives to the temple. The girl 
herself seemed to have spoken of Raju as her savior. She had 
told everyone, "He doesn't speak to anyone, but if he looks 
at you, you are changed." 

His circle was gradually widening. Velan, at the end of his 
day's agricultural toil, came and sat on the lower step. If Raju 
spoke, he listened; otherwise he accepted the silence with equal 
gratitude, got up without a word when darkness fell, and 
moved away. Gradually, unnoticed, a few others began to 
arrive very regularly. Raju could not very well question who 
they were: the river bank was a public place, and he himself 
was an intruder. They just sat there on the lower step and 
looked at Raju and kept looking at him. He didn't have to 
say a word to anyone: he just sat there at the same place, look- 
ing away at the river, at the other bank, and tried hard to 
think where he should go next and what do. They did not so 
much as whisper a word for fear that it might disturb him. 
Raju was beginning to feel uncomfortable on these occasions, 
and wondered if he could devise some means of escape from 
their company. Throughout the day he was practically left 
alone, but late in the evening, after. doing their day's work, 
the villagers would come. 

One evening before the company arrived he moved himself 
to the back yard of the temple and hid himself behind a 
gigantic hibiscus bush full of red flowers. He heard them ar- 
rive, heard their voices on the river step. They were talking 
in low, hushed voices. They went round the building and 
passed by the hibiscus bush. Raju's heart palpitated as he 
crouched there like an animal at bay. He held his breath and 
waited. He was already planning to offer an explanation if 
26 



they should discover his presence there. He would say that 
he was in deep thought and that the hibiscus shade was con- 
genial for such contemplation. But fortunately they did not 
look for him there. They stood near the bush talking in a 
hushed, awed whisper. Said one, "Where could he have gone?" 

"He is a big man, he may go anywhere; he may have a 
thousand things to do." 

"Oh, you don't know. He has renounced the world; he does 
nothing but meditate. What a pity he is not here today!" 

"Just sitting there for a few minutes with him — ah, what a 
change it has brought about in our household! Do you know, 
that cousin of mine came round last night and gave me back 
the promissory note. As long as he held it, I felt as if I had 
put a knife in his hand for stabbing us." 

"We won't have to fear anything more; it is our good 
fortune that this great soul should have come to live, in our 
midst." 

"But he has disappeared today. Wonder if he has left us for 
good." 

"It would be our misfortune if he went away." 

"His clothes are still all there in the hall." 

"He has no fears." 

"The food I brought yesterday has been eaten." 

"Leave there what you have brought now; he is sure to come 
back from his outing and feel hungry." Raju felt grateful to 
this man for his sentiment. 

"Do you know sometimes these Yogis can travel to the 
Himalayas just by a thought?" 

"I don't think he is that kind of Yogi," said another. 

"Who can say? Appearances are sometimes misleading," said 
someone. They then moved off to their usual seat and sat there. 
For a long time Raju could hear them talking among them- 
selves. After a while they left. Raju could hear them splashing 
the water with their feet. "Let us go before it gets too dark. 
They say that there is an old crocodile in this part of the river.'* 

27 



"A boy known to me was held up by his ankle once, at this 
very spot." 

"What happened, then?" 

"He was dragged down, next day. . . ." 

Raju could hear their voices far off. He cautiously peeped 
out of his hiding. He could see theu* shadowy figures on the 
other bank. He waited till they vanished altogether from sight. 
He went in and lit a lamp. He was hungry. They had left his 
food wrapped in a banana leaf on the pedestal of the old stone 
image. Raju was filled with gratitude and prayed that Velan 
might never come to the stage of thinking that he was too 
good for food and that he subsisted on atoms from the air. 

Next morning he rose early and went through his ablutions, 
washed his clothes in the river, lit the stove, made himself 
coffee, and felt completely at ease with the world. He had to 
decide on his future today. He should either go back to the 
town of his birth, bear the giggles and stares for a few days, 
or go somewhere else. Where could he go? He had not trained 
himself to make a living out of hard work. Food was coming 
to him unasked now. If he went away somewhere else certainly 
nobody was going to take the trouble to bring him food in 
return for just waiting for it. The only other place where it 
could happen was the prison. Where could he go now? No- 
where. Cows grazing on the slopes far off gave the place an 
air of sublime stillness. He realized that he had no alternative: 
he must play the role that Velan had given him. 

With his mind made up he prepared himself to meet Velan 
and his friends in the evening. He sat as usual on the stone 
slab with beatitude and calm in his face. The thing that had 
really bothered him was that he might sound too brilliant in 
everything he said. He had observed silence as a precaution. 
But that fear was now gone. He decided to look as brilliant as 
he could manage, let drop gems of thought from his lips, as- 
sume all the radiance available, and afford them all the guidance 
28 



they required without stint. He decided to arrange the stage 
for the display with more thoroughness. With this view he 
transferred his seat to the inner hall of the temple. It gave one 
a better background. He sat there at about the time he expected 
Velan and others to arrive. He anticipated their arrival with a 
certain excitement. He composed his features and pose to re- 
ceive them. 

The sun was setting. Its tint touched the wall with pink. The 
tops of the coconut trees around were aflame. The bird-cries 
went up in a crescendo before dying down for the night. 
Darkness fell. Still there was no sign of Velan or anyone. They 
did not come that night. He was left foodless; that was not the 
main worry, he still had a few bananas. Suppose they never 
came again? What was to happen? He became panicky. All 
night he lay worrying. All his old fears returned. If he re- 
turned to the town he would have to get his house back from 
the man to whom he had mortgaged it. He would have to fight 
for a living space in his own home or find the cash to redeem 
it. 

He debated whether to step across the river, walk into the 
village, and search for Velan. It didn't seem a dignified thing 
to do. It might make him look cheap, and they might ignore 
him altogether. 

He saw a boy grazing his sheep on the opposite bank. He 
clapped his hands and cried, "Come here." He went down the 
steps and cried across the water, "I am the new priest of this 
temple, boy, come here. I have a plantain for you. Come and 
take it." He flourished it, feeling that this was perhaps a 
gamble; it was the last piece of fruit in his store and might 
presently be gone, as might the boy, and Velan might never 
know how badly he was wanted, while he, Raju, lay starving 
there until they found his bleached bones in the temple and 
added them to the ruins around. With these thoughts he 
flourished the banana. The boy was attracted by it and soon 
came across the water. He was short and was wet up to his 

29 



cars. Raju said, "Take off your turban and dry yourself, boy." 

"I am not afraid of water," he said. 

"You should not be so wet." 

The boy held out his hand for the plantain and said, "I can 
swim. I always swim." 

"But I have never seen you here before," Raju said. 

"I don't come here. I go farther down and swim." 

"Why don't you come here?" 

"This is a crocodile place," he said. 

"But I have never seen any crocodile." 

"You will sometime," the boy said. "My sheep generally 
graze over there. I came to see if a man was here." 

"Why?" 

"My uncle asked me to watch. He said, 'Drive your sheep 
before that temple and see if a man is there.' That is why I 
came here today." 

Raju gave the boy the banana and said, "Tell your, uncle 
that the man is back here and tell him to come here this eve- 
ning." 

He did not wait to ask who the uncle was. Whoever he 
might be, he was welcome. The boy peeled the plantain, swal- 
lowed it whole, and started munching the peel also. "Why do 
you eat the peel? It will make you sick," Raju said. 

"No, it won't," the boy replied. He seemed to be a resolute 
boy who knew his mind. 

Raju vaguely advised, "You must be a good boy. Now be 
off. Tell your uncle — " 

The boy was off, after cautioning him, "Keep an eye on 
those till I get back." He indicated his flock on the opposite 
slope. 



30 



Chapter Three 



«xS>«>^x$x$>^xS^^^$HgxSx$KS^xS^^>^ 



One fine day, beyond the tamarind tree the station building 
was ready. The steel tracks gleamed in the sun; the signal posts 
stood with their red and green stripes and their colorful lamps; 
and our world was neatly divided into this side of the railway 
line and that side. Everything was ready. All our spare hours 
were spent in walking along the railway track up to the cul- 
vert half a mile away. We paced up and down our platform, 
a gold mohur sapling was planted in the railway yard. We 
passed through the corridor, peeping into the room meant for 
the stationmaster. 

One day we were all given a holiday. "The train comes to 
our town today," people said excitedly. The station was dec- 
orated with festoons and bunting. A piper was playing, bands 
were banging away. Coconuts were broken on the railway 
track, and an engine steamed in, pulling a couple of cars. Many 
of the important folk of the town were there. The Collector 
and the Police Superintendent and the Municipal Chairman, 
and many of the local tradesmen, who flourished green in- 
vitation cards in their hands, were assembled at the station. 
The police guarded the platform and did not allow the crowds 
in. I felt cheated by this. I felt indignant that anyone should 
prohibit my entry to the platform. I squeezed myself through 
the railings at the farthest end, and by the time the engine 
arrived I was there to receive it. I was probably so small that 
no one noticed my presence. 

31 



Tables were laid and official gentlemen sat around refreshing 
thci.iselves, aid then several men got up and lectured. I was 
av/rre only c' the word "Malgudi" recurring in their speeches. 
Thore was a c lapping of hands. The band struck up, the engine 
wliistled, the 3cll rang, the guard blew his whistle, and the men 
w!x had bee.j -consuming refreshments climbed into the train. 
I v-as half inclined to follow their example, but there were 
n -^ny policerrcn to stop me. The train moved and was soon 
cat of siorht. V bie crowd was now allowed to come onto the 
liiatform. M ' father's shop had record sales that day. 

By the tii le a stationmaster and a porter were installed in 
their little s.one house at the back of the station, facing our 
house, my ather had become so prosperous that he acquired 
a jutka an J a horse in order to go to the town and do his 
shopping. 

My mct'ier had been apathetic. "Why should you have all 
this additional bother in this household, horse and horse gram 
and all that, while the buffalo pair is a sufficient bother?" 

He did not answer her in any detail, just swept off her ob- 
jections with, "You know nothing about these things. I have 
so much to do every day in the town. I have to visit the bank 
so often." He uttered the word "bank" with a proud emphasis, 
but it did not impress my mother. 

And so there was an addition of a thatch-roofed shed to our 
yard, in which a brown pony was tied up, and my father had 
picked up a groom to look after it. We became the talk of the 
town with this horse and carriage, but my mother never recon- 
ciled herself to it. She viewed it as an extraordinary vanity on 
my father's part and no amount of explanation from him ever 
convinced her otherwise. Her view was that my father had 
overestimated his business, and she nagged him whenever he 
was found at home and the horse and carriage were not put 
to proper use. She expected him to be always going round the 
streets in his vehicle. He had not more than an hour's job any 
day in the town and he always came back in time to attend to 

32 



his shop, which he was now leaving in charge of a friend for 
a few hours in the day. My mother was developing into a 
successful nagger, I suppose, for my father was losing much 
of his aggressiveness and was becoming very apologetic about 
his return home whenever the horse and the carriage were left 
unused under the tamarind tree. "You take it and go to the 
market, if you like," he often said, but my mother spurned 
the offer, explaining, "Where should I go every day? Some- 
day it may be useful for going to the temple on a Friday. But 
ought you to maintain an extravagant turnout all through the 
year, just for a possible visit to the temple? Horse gram and 
grass, do you know what they cost?" Fortunately, it did not 
prove such a liability after all. Worn out by Mother's per- 
sistent opposition, my father seriously considered disposing of 
the horse and (a fantastic proposal) converting the carriage 
into a single bullock cart with a "bow spring" mounted over 
the wheel, which a blacksmith of his acquaintance at the 
market gate had promised to do for him. 

The groom who minded the horse laughed at the idea and 
said that it was an impossible proposition, convincing my 
father that the blacksmith would reduce the carriage to a piece 
of furniture fit for lounging under the tamarind tree. "You 
could as well listen to a promise to turn the horse into a bul- 
lock!" he said, and then he made a proposal which appealed 
to my father's business instinct. "Let me ply it for hire in the 
market. All gram and grass my charge — only let me use your 
shed. I will hand you two rupees a day and one rupee a month 
for the use of the shed, and anything I earn over two rupees 
should be mine.'* 

This was a delightful solution. My father had the use of the 
carriage whenever he wanted it, and earned a sum for it each 
day, and no liabilities. As the days passed, the driver came 
along and pleaded lack of engagements. A great deal of argu- 
ment went on in the front part of my house, in semidarkness, 
bets^een my father and the driver as my father tried to exact 

33 



his t»vo rupees. Finally my mother too joined in, saying, "Don't 
trust these fellows. Today with all that festival crowd, he says 
he has not made any money. How can we believe him?" 

My mother was convinced that the cart-driver drank his 
earnings. My father retorted, "What if he drinks? It is none 
of our business." 

Every day this went on. Every night the man stood under 
the tree and cringed and begged for remission. It was evident 
that he was misappropriating our funds. For within a few 
weeks the man came and said, "This horse is growing bony 
and will not run properly, and is becoming wrong-headed. 
It is better we sell it off soon and take another, because all the 
passengers who get into this jutka complain and pay less at 
the end because of the discomfort suffered. And the springs 
over the wheels must also be changed." The man was con- 
stantly suggesting that the turnout had better be sold off and 
a new one taken. Whenever he said it within my mother's 
hearing she lost her temper and shouted at him, saying that 
one horse and carriage were sufficient expense. This reduced 
my father to viewing the whole arrangement as a hopeless li- 
ability, until the man hinted that he had an offer of seventy 
rupees for both horse and carriage. My father managed to 
raise this to seventy-five and finally the man brought the cash 
and drove off the turnout himself. Evidently he had saved a 
lot of our own money for this enterprise. Anyway, we were 
glad to be rid of the thing. This was a nicely calculated trans- 
action, for as soon as the trains began to arrive regularly at our 
station we found our jutka doing a brisk business carrying 
passengers to the town. 

My father was given the privilege of running a shop at the 
railway station. What a shop it was! It was paved with cement, 
with shelves built in. It was so spacious that when my father 
had transferred all the articles from the hut shop, the place was 

34 



only one-quarter filled; there were so many blank spaces all 
along the wall that he felt depressed at the sight of it. For the 
first time he was beginning to feel that he had not been run- 
ning a very big business after all. 

My mother had come out to watch the operation and taunted 
him. "With this stock you think of buying motor cars and 
whatnot." He had not at any time proposed buying a motor 
car, but she liked to nag him. 

Father said, rather weakly, "Why drag in all that now?" He 
was ruminating. "I shall need at least another Rvc hundred 
rupees' worth of articles to fill up all this space." 

The stationmaster, an old man wearing a green turban round 
his head and silver-rimmed spectacles, came along to survey the 
shop. My father became extremely deferential at the sight of 
him. Behind him stood Karia the porter in his blue shirt and 
turban. My mother withdrew unobtrusively and went back 
home. The stationmaster viewed the shop from a distance with 
his head on one side as if he were an artist viewing a handi- 
work. The porter, ever faithful, followed his example, keeping 
himself in readiness to agree with whatever he might say. The 
stationmaster said, "Fill up all that space — otherwise the ATS 
might come round and ask questions, poking his nose into rU 
our affairs. It has not been easy to give you this shop. . . ." 

My father sat me in the shop and went over to the town 
to make the purchases. "Don't display too much rice and othei 
stuff — keep the other shop for such things," advised the sta- 
tionmaster. "Railway passengers won't be asking for tamarind 
and lentils during the journey." My father implicitly accepted 
his directions. The stationmaster was his palpable God now and 
he cheerfully obeyed all his commands. And so presently there 
hung down from nails in my father's other shop bigger bunches 
of bananas, stacks of Mempu oranges, huge troughs of fried 
stuff, and colorful peppermints and sweets in glass containers, 
loaves of bread, and buns. The display was most appetizing, 

35 



and he had loaded several racks with packets of cigarettes. He 
had to anticipate the demand of every kind of traveler and 
provide for it. 

He left me in charge of his hut shop. His old customers came 
down to gossip and shop, as had been their habit. But they 
found me unequal to it. I found it tedious to listen to their 
talk of litigation and irrigation. I was not old enough to ap- 
preciate all their problems and the subtleties of their trans- 
actions. I listened to them without response, and soon they 
discovered that I was no good companion for them. They left 
me in peace and wandered off to the other shop, seeking my 
father's company. But they found it untenable. They felt 
strange there. It was too sophisticated a surrounding for them. 

Very soon, unobtrusively, my father was back in his seat at 
the hut shop, leaving me to handle the business in the new 
shop. As soon as a certain bridge off Malgudi was ready, 
regular service began on our rails; it was thrilling to watch 
the activities of the stationmaster and the blue-shirted porter 
as they "received" and "line-cleared" two whole trains each 
day, the noon train from Madras and the evening one from 
Trichy. I became very active indeed in the shop. As you might 
have guessed, all this business expansion in our family helped 
me achieve a very desirable end — the dropping off of my 
school unobtrusively. 



3« 



Chapter Four 



«>^^^^^x$x$xS^^K$v<$xJx$xg^^x$x^ 



The banana worked a miracle. The boy went from house to 
house, announcing that the saint was back at his post. Men, 
women, and children arrived in a great mass. All that they 
wanted was to be allowed to look at him and watch the radi- 
ance on his face. The children stood around and gazed in awe. 
Raju tried to manage the situatioa by pinching a few cheeks 
and saying some inanities, or even indulging in baby-talk in 
order to soften the awkwardness of the situation. He went up 
to young boys and asked, "What are you studying?" in the 
manner of big men he had seen in cities. But it was stupid to 
imitate that question here, because the boys giggled, looked at 
one another, and said, "No school for us." 

"What do you do all day?" he asked, without any real in- 
terest in their problems. 

One of the elders interposed to say, **We cannot send our 
boys to the school as you do in towns; they have to take the 
cattle out for grazing." 

Raju clicked his tongue in disapproval. He shook his head. 
The gathering looked pained and anxious. Raju explained 
grandly, "Boys must read, first. They must, of course, help 
their parents, but they must also find the time to study." He 
added on an inspiration, "If they cannot find the time to read 
during the day, why should they not gather in the evenings 
and learn?" 

"Where?" asked someone 

37 



"Maybe here." Raju added, pointing at the vast hall, "Maybe 
you could ask one of your masters. Is there no schoolmaster 
in your midst?" 

"Yes, yes," several voices cried in unison. 

"Ask him to see me," Raju commanded authoritatively, with 
the air of a president summoning a defaulting assistant master. 

Next afternoon a timid man, who wore a short tuft with a 
turban over it, turned up at the temple hall. Raju had just 
finished his repast and was enjoying a siesta in the hall, stretch- 
ing himself on its cool granite floor. The timid man stood be- 
side an ancient pillar and cleared his throat. Raju opened his 
eyes and looked at him blankly. It was not the custom there, in 
that society, to ask who or why, when so many came and went. 
Raju flourished an arm to indicate to the other to sit down 
and resumed his sleep. When he awoke later, he saw the man 
sitting close to him. 

"I'm the teacher," the man said, and in the muddled state 
of half-sleep Raju's old fears of schoolteachers returned: he 
forgot for a split second that he had left all those years behind. 
He sat up. 

The master was rather surprised. He said, "Don*t disturb 
yourself. I can wait." 

"That's all right," said Raju, recovering his composure and 
understanding his surroundings better. "You are the school- 
master?" he asked patronizingly. He brooded for a moment, 
then asked in a general way, "How is everything?" 

The other merely replied, "No different from what it used 
to be." 

"How do you like it?" 

"What does it matter?" the other said. "I only try to do my 
best and do it sincerely." 

"Otherwise, what's the use of doing anything at all?" asked 
Raju. He was marking time. He was not very clear-headed 
yet after the deep sleep, and the problem of boys' education 

38 



was not uppermost in his mind at the moment. He said tenta- 
tively, "After all, one's duty — *' 

"I do my utmost," said the other defensively, not wishing 
to give way. After these parleys, which lasted for half an hour, 
the village master himself clarified the position. "It seems you 
suggested that the boys should be assembled here and taught 
at nights." 

"Oh! eh!" Raju said. "Yes, I did, of course, but it's a matter 
in which the decision should be purely yours. After all, self- 
help is the best help; I may be here today and gone tomorrow. 
It's up to you to arrange it. I meant that if you want a place — 
you can have it." He swept his arm about with the air of one 
conferring a gift on a whole community. 

The teacher looked thoughtful for a moment and began, 
"I'm not sure, however — " 

But Raju suddenly became argumentative and definite. He 
said with a lot of authority, "I like to see young boys become 
literate and intelligent." He added with fervor because it 
sounded nice, "It's our duty to make everyone happy and 
wise." 

This overwhelming altruism was too much for the teacher. 
"I'll do anything," he said, "under your guidance." Raju ad- 
mitted the position with, "I'm but an instrument accepting 
guidance myself." 

The result was that the teacher went back to the village a 
changed man. Next day he was back at the pillared hall with 
a dozen children of the village. They had their foreheads 
smeared with sacred ash, and their slates creaked in the silent 
night, while the teacher lectured to them, and Raju, seated 
on his platform, looked on benignly. The teacher was apolo- 
getic about the numbers: he could muster only about a dozen 
boys. "They are afraid of crossing the river in the dark; they 
have heard of a crocodile hereabouts." 

"What can a crocodile do to you if your mind is clear and 

39 



your conscience is untroubled?" Raju said grandly. It was a 
wonderful sentiment to express. He was surprised at the 
amount of wisdom welling from the depths of his being. He 
said to the teacher, "Don't be dispirited that there are only a 
dozen. If you do your work sincerely by a dozen, it'll be 
equivalent, really, to serving a hundred times that number." 

The teacher suggested, "Do not mistake me, but will you 
speak to these boys whenever you can?" This gave Raju a 
chance to air his views on life and eternity before the boys. 
He spoke to them on godliness, cleanliness, spoke on Rama- 
yana, the characters in the epics; he addressed them on all 
kinds of things. He was hypnotized by his own voice; he felt 
himself growing in stature as he saw the upturned faces of 
the children shining in the half-light when he spoke. No one 
was more impressed with the grandeur of the whole thing than 
Raju himself. 

Now that I reflect upon it, I am convinced I was not such a 
dud after all. It seems to me that we generally do not have a 
correct measure of our own wisdom. I remember how I was 
equipping my mind all the time. I read a certain amount of 
good stuff in my railway-shopkeeping days. I sat in that shop, 
selling loaves of bread and aerated water. Sometimes school- 
boys left their books with me for sale. Though my father 
thought very highly of our shop, I could not share his view. 
Selling bread and biscuits and accepting money in exchange 
seemed to me a tame occupation. I always felt that I was too 
good for the task. . . . 

My father died during the rainy part of that year. His end 
was sudden. He had been selling and talking to his cronies in 
his hut shop till late at night; then he counted the cash, came 
into the house, consumed his rice and buttermilk, laid himself 
down to sleep, and never woke again. 

My mother adjusted herself to the status of a widow. My 
father left her enough to live on comfortably. I gave her as 
40 



much of my time as possible. With her consent, I closed down 
my father's shop and set up at the railway station. It was then 
that I began to develop new lines. I stocked old magazines and 
newspapers, and bought and sold schoolbooks. Of course my 
customers were not many, but the train brought in more and 
more school-going population, and the 10:30 local was full of 
young men going off to Albert Mission College, which had 
just been started at Malgudi. I liked to talk to people. I liked 
to hear people talk. I liked customers who would not open 
their mouths merely to put a plantain in, and would say some- 
thing on any subject except the state of crops, price of com- 
modities, and litigation. I am afraid, after my father's death, 
his old friends wilted away and disappeared one by one, 
chiefly for want of an audience. 

Students gathered at my shop while they waited for the 
trains. Gradually books appeared where there were coconuts 
before. People dumped old books and stolen books and all 
kinds of printed stuff on me. I bargained hard, showed indif- 
ference while buying and solicitude while selling. Strictly 
speaking, it was an irregular thing to do. But the stationmaster 
was a friendly man who not only obtained unlimited credit 
for anything he and his children took from my shop, but also 
enjoyed the privilege of drawing his reading material from the 
stack growing in front of my shop. 

My bookselling business was an unexpected offshoot of my 
search for old wrapping paper. When people bought something 
I hated to see them carry it off in their hands. I liked to wrap 
it up nicely, as well as I could, but as long as my father was 
in control he said, "If anyone brings a piece of paper, he is 
welcome to wrap up anything; but I can't do it for him. Profit 
being what it is, we can't afford to spend it on wrapping paper. 
If a man buys oil, let him bring a pot to carry it in. Do we 
provide him with that?" While he practiced this philosophy it 
was impossible for anyone to find even a scrap of paper in our 
shop. After his death I adopted a new policy. I made it known 

41 



far and wide that I was looking for old paper and books, and 
soon gathered a big dump. In my off-hours I sat sorting it out. 
During the interval between trains, when the platform became 
quiet, there was nothing more pleasing than picking up a 
bundle of assorted books and lounging in my seat and reading, 
occasionally breaking off to watch through the doorway the 
immense tamarind tree in the field. I read stuff that interested 
me, bored me, baffled me, and dozed off in my seat. I read 
stuff that pricked up a noble thought, a philosophy that ap- 
pealed, I gazed on pictxires of old temples and ruins and new 
buildings and battleships, and soldiers, and pretty girls around 
whom my thoughts lingered. I learned much from scrap. 

The children were enchanted by the talk they had had in their 
class from Raju (even their master sat absorbed in open- 
mouthed wonder). They went home and described the won- 
ders they had been told about. They were impatient to be back 
on the following evening and listen to more. Very soon the 
parents joined their childrea They explained apologetically, 
*'Children come home rather late, you see, master, and are 
afraid to return home — especially crossing the river at night — " 

"Excellent, excellent," Raju said. *1 wanted to suggest it my- 
self. I'm glad you have thought of it. There is no harm. In fact, 
you may also benefit by keeping your ears open. Keep your 
ears open and mouth shut, that'll take you far," he said, hitting 
upon a brilliant aphorism. 

A circle formed around him. They sat there looking on. 
The children sat there looking on. The master sat there looking 
on. The pillared hall was bright with the lanterns the villagers 
had brought with them. It looked like a place where a great 
assembly was about to begin. Raju felt like an actor who had 
come on the stage, and, while the audience waited, had no lines 
to utter or gestures to make. He said to the master, "I think 
you may take the children away to their corner for their usual 
lessons; take one of the lamps with you." 

4^ 



Even as he said it he could not help thinking how he was 
issuing an order about the boys who were not his, to the teacher 
who need not obey him, pointing to a lamp which again was 
not his. The teacher started to obey him, but the boys lingered 
on. He said, "You must read your lessons first and then I will 
come and speak to you. Now I will first speak to your elders — 
what I say to them will not interest you." And the children got 
up and went away with the teacher to a farther corner of the 
pillared hall. 

Velan ventured to suggest, "Give us a discourse,^ sir." And as 
Raju listened without showing any emotion, but looking as if 
he were in deep contemplation, Velan added, "So that we may 
have the benefit of your wisdom." The others murmured a 
general approval. 

Raju felt cornered. "I have to play the part expected of me; 
there is no escape." He racked his head secretly, wondering 
where to start. Could he speak about tourists* attractions in 
Malgudi, or should it be moral lessons? How once upon a time 
there was a so and so, so good or bad that when he came to do 
such and such a thing he felt so utterly lost that he prayed, and 
so on and so forth? He felt bored. The only subject on which 
he could speak with any authority now seemed to be jail life 
and its benefits, especially for one mistaken for a saint. They 
waited respectfully for his inspiration. "Oh, fools," he felt like 
crying out. "Why don't you leave me alone? If you bring me 
food, leave it there and leave me in peace, thank you." 

After a long, brooding silence, he brought out the following 
words: "All things have to wait their hour." Velan and his 
friends who were in the front row looked worried for a mo- 
ment; they were deferential, no doubt, but they did not quite 
realize what he was driving at. After a further pause, he added 
grandiosely, "I will speak to you when another day comes." 

Someone asked, "Why another day, sir?" 

"Because it is so," said Raju mysteriously. "While you wait 
for the children to finish their lessons, Fd advise you to pass 

43 



the hour brooding over all your speech and actions from 
morning till now." 

"What speech and actions?" someone asked, genuinely puz- 
zled by the advice. 

"Your own," said Raju. "Recollect and reflect upon every 
word you have uttered since daybreak — " 

"I don't remember exactly. . . ." 

"Well, that is why I say reflect, recollect. When you don't 
remember your own words properly, how are you going to 
remember other people's words?" This quip amused his audi- 
ence. There were bursts of subdued laughter. When the laugh- 
ter subsided Raju said, "I want you all to think independently, 
of your own accord, and not allow yourselves to be led about 
by the nose as if you were cattle." 

There were murmurs of polite disagreement over this advice. 
Velan asked, "How can we do that, sir? We dig the land 
and mind the cattle — so far so good, but how can we think 
philosophies? Not our line, master. It is not possible. It is wise 
persons like your good self who should think for us." 

"And why do you ask us to recollect all that we have said 
since daybreak?" 

Raju himself was not certain why he had advised that, and so 
he added, "If you do it you will know why." The essence of 
sainthood seemed to lie in one's ability to utter mystifying 
statements. "Until you try, how can you know what you can 
or cannot do?" he asked. He was dragging those innocent men 
deeper and deeper into the bog of unclear thoughts. 

"I can't remember what I said a few moments ago; so many 
other things come into one's head," wailed one of his victims. 

"Precisely. That is what I wish to see you get over," said Raju. 
"Until you do it, you will not know the pleasure of it." He 
picked out three men from the gathering. "When you come to 
me tomorrow or another day, you must each repeat to me at 
least six words that you have been speaking since the morning. 
I am asking you to remember only six words," he said plead- 

44 



ingly as a man who was making a great concession, **not six 
hundred." 

"Six hundred! Is there anyone who can remember six hun- 
dred, sir?" asked someone with wonder. 

"Well, I can," said Raju. And he got the appreciative clicking 
of tongues which he expected as his legitimate due. Soon the 
children were there, a great boon to Raju, who rose from his 
seat as if to say, "That is all for the day," and walked toward 
the river, the others following. "These children must be feeling 
sleepy. Take them safely home, and come again." 

When the assembly met next, he provided it with a specific 
program. He beat a soft rhythm with his hands and chanted 
a holy song with a refrain that could be repeated by his audi- 
ence. The ancient ceiling echoed with the voices of men, 
women, and children repeating sacred texts in unison. Someone 
had brought in tall bronze lamps and lit them. Others fed them 
with oil; others had spent a whole day twisting bits. of cotton 
into wicks for the lamps. People brought of their own accord 
little framed pictures of gods and hung them on the pillars. 
Very soon women started to come in batches during the day 
to wash the floor and decorate it with patterns in colored flour; 
they hung up flowers and greenery and festoons everywhere. 
The pillared hall was transformed. Someone had also covered 
the platform in the middle of the hall with a soft colored car- 
pet; mats were rolled out for the assembly to sit on. 

Raju soon realized that his spiritual status would be enhanced 
if he grew a beard and long hair to fall on his nape. A clean- 
shaven, close-haired saint was an anomaly. He bore the various 
stages of his make-up with fortitude, not minding the prickly 
phase he had to pass through before a well-authenticated beard 
could cover his face and come down his chest. By the time he 
arrived at the stage of stroking his beard thoughtfully, his pres- 
tige had grown beyond his wildest dreams. His life had lost its 
personal limitations; his gatherings had become so large that 

45 



they overflowed into the outer corridors and people sat right 
up to the river's edge. 

With the exception of Velan and a few others, Raju never 
bothered to remember faces or names or even to know to 
whom he was talking. He seemed to belong to the world now. 
His influence was unlimited. He not only chanted holy verses 
and discoursed on philosophy, he even came to the stage of 
prescribing medicine; children who would not sleep peacefully 
at night were brought to him by their mothers; he pressed their 
belHes and prescribed a herb, adding, "If he still gets no relief, 
bring him again to me." It was believed that when he stroked 
the head of a child, the child improved in various ways. Of 
course, people brought him their disputes and quarrels over the 
division of ancestral property. He had to set apart several hours 
of his afternoon for these activities. He could hardly afford a 
private life now. Came a stage when he had to be up early and 
rush through all his own personal routine before his visitors 
should arrive. It was a strain. He sighed a deep sigh of relief 
and turned to be himself, eat like an ordinary human being, 
shout and sleep like a normal man, after the voices on the river 
had ceased for the night. 



4<5 



Chapter Five 



•^^/^>^^>^>^^f^^><$><^^^$>^><^^/$/$>^/^^^>^$^ 



I CAME to be called Railway Raju. Perfect strangers, having 
heard of my name, began to ask for me when their train arrived 
at the Malgudi railway station. It is written on the brow of 
some that they shall not be left alone. I am one such, I think. 
Although I never looked for acquaintances, they somehow 
came looking for me. Men who had just arrived always stopped 
at my shop for a soda or cigarettes and to go through the book 
stack, and almost always they asked, *'How far is . . . ?" or 
"Which way does one go to reach . . . ?" or "Are there many 
historical spots here?" or "I heard that your River Sarayu has 
its source somewhere on those hills and that it is a beauty spot." 
This sort of inquiry soon led me to think that I had not given 
sufficient thought to the subject, I never said, "I don't know." 
Not in my nature, I suppose. If I had the inclination to say "I 
don't know what you are talking about," my life would have 
taken a different turn. Instead, I said, "Oh, yes, a fascinating 
place. Haven't you seen it? You must find the time to visit it, 
otherwise your whole trip here would be a waste." I am sorry 
I said it, an utter piece of falsehood. It was not because I wanted 
to utter a falsehood, but only because I wanted to be pleasant. 
Naturally, they next asked me the way. I said, "If you just 
go that way down to the Market Square and ask one of those 
taxi-drivers . . ." This was not a very satisfactory direction. 
Soon a man wanted me to show him the way to the Market 
Square and the taxi. There was a young son of the porter doing 

47 



points-signaling duty whenever a train was about to arrive, 
who had no specified work to do at other times. I asked the 
young fellow to mind the shop while I helped the traveler to 
find a taxi. 

At the market fountain stood the old shark Gaffur, looking 
for a victim. Fie made a specialty of collecting all the derelict 
vehicles in the country and rigging them up; he breathed new 
Hfe into them and ran them on the mountain roads and into 
the forests. His usual seat was on the parapet of the fountain, 
while his car basked on the roadside beside the gutter. "Gaf- 
fur," I called out. "Here is a very good gentleman, a friend of 
mine. He wants to see . . . You must take him out and bring 
him back safely — that is why I have brought him to you per- 
sonally, although this is not an hour when I should be away 
from my shop." We haggled over the prices; I allowed the 
customer to mention his figure and always tried to beat Gaffur 
down to it. When he demurred at the sight of the vehicle, I 
took up Gaff ur's brief and explained, "Gaffur is no fool to have 
this kind of car. He searched far and wide to find this particu- 
lar model; this is the only car which can go up to all those 
places where in some parts there are no roads at all, but Gaffur 
will take you there and bring you back in time for dinner to- 
night. Can't you, Gaffur?" 

"Well," he drawled, "it is seventy miles each way; it is one 
o'clock now. If we leave at once and if there are no punctures 
on the way . . ." But I hustled him so much that Gaffur never 
really completed his sentence. When they returned it could 
not exactly be called dinnertime, unless you stretched it to in- 
clude midnight, but Gaffur did bring him back intact, honked 
his car to wake me up, took his cash, and departed. The next 
train for the man would be at eight on the following morning. 
He had to stretch himself under the awning on the platform 
of my shop and spend the night thus. If he felt hungry, I 
opened my store and sold him fruits and such things. 

Travelers are an enthusiastic lot. They do not mind any 

48 



inconvenience as long as they have something to see. Why any- 
one should want to forgo food and comfort and jolt a hundred- 
odd miles to see some place, I could never understand, but it 
was not my business to ask for reasons; just as I did not mind 
what people ate or smoked in my shop, my business being only 
to provide the supply and nothing more. It seemed to me silly 
to go a hundred miles to see the source of Sarayu when it had 
taken the trouble to tumble down the mountain and come to 
our door. I had not even heard of its source till that moment; 
but the man who had gone was all praise for the spot. He said, 
"I am only sorry I did not bring my wife and mother to see the 
place." Later in life I found that everyone who saw an interest- 
ing spot always regretted that he hadn't come with his wife or 
daughter, and spoke as if he had cheated someone out of a nice 
thing in life. Later, when I had become a full-blown tourist 
guide, I often succeeded in inducing a sort of melancholia in 
my customer by remarking, "This is something that should be 
enjoyed by the whole family," and the man would swear that 
he would be back with his entire brood in the coming season. 
The man who had gone to the source of the river spoke all 
night about it: how there was a small shrine on the peak right 
at the basin. "It must be the source of Sarayu mentioned in 
the mythological stories of goddess Parvathi jumping into the 
fire; the carving on one of the pillars of the shrine actually 
shows the goddess plunging into the fire and water arising 
from the spot," et cetera. Sometimes someone with a scholarly 
turn of mind would come and make a few additions to the 
facts, such as that the dome of the shrine must have been built 
in the third century before Christ or that the style of drapery 
indicated the third century after Christ. But it was all the same 
to me, and the age I ascribed to any particular place depended 
upon my mood at that hour and the type of person I was 
escorting. If he was the academic type I was careful to avoid 
all mention of facts and figures and to confine myself to gen- 
eral descriptions, letting the man himself do the talking. You 

49 



may be sure he enjoyed the opportunity. On the other hand, 
if an innocent man happened to be at hand, I let myself go 
freely. I pointed out to him something as the greatest, the high- 
est, the only one in the world. I gave statistics out of my head. 
I mentioned a relic as belonging to the thirteenth century be- 
fore Christ or the thirteenth century after Christ, according to 
the mood of the hour. If I felt fatigued or bored with the per- 
son I was conducting, I sometimes knocked the whole glamour 
out by saying, "Must be something built within the last t^^-enty 
years and allowed to go to rack and ruin. There are scores of 
such spots all over the place." But it was years before I could 
arrive at that stage of confidence and nonchalance. 

The porter's son sat in the shop all day. I spent a little time 
each ni^ht to check the cash and stock. There was no definite 

o 

arrangement about what he should be paid for his trouble. I 
gave him a little money now and then. Only my mother pro- 
tested. "Why do you want him to work for you, Raju? Either 
give him a definite commission or do it yourself instead of all 
this wandering in the country. What good does it do you, 
anyway?" 

"You don't know. Mother," I said, eating my late dinner. 
"This is a far better job I am doing than the other one. I am 
seeing a lot of places and getting paid for it; I go with them in 
their car or bus, talk to them, I am treated to their food some- 
times, and I get paid for it. Do you know how well known I 
am? People come asking for me from Bombay, Madras, and 
other places, hundreds of miles away. They call me Railway 
Raju and have told me that even in Lucknow there are persons 
who are familiar with my name. It is something to become so 
famous, isn't it, instead of handing out matches and tobacco?" 
"Well, wasn't it good enough for your father?" 
"I don't say anything against it. I will look after the shop 
also." This pleased the old lady. Occasionally she threw in a 
word about her brother's daughter in the village before blow- 
ing out the lamp. She was always hoping that some day I would 

50 



consent to marry the girl, though she never directly said so. 
"Do you know Lalitha has got a prize in her school? I had a 
letter from my brother today about it." 

Even as the train steamed in at the outer signal, I could scent 
a customer. I had a kind of water-diviner's instinct. If I felt the 
pull of good business I drifted in the direction of the coming 
train; I could stand exactly where a prospective tourist would 
alight and look for me: it was not only the camera or binocu- 
lars slung on a shoulder that indicated to me the presence of a 
customer; even without any of that I could spot him. If you 
found me straying away in the direction of the barrier while 
the engine was still running through the lines onto the plat- 
form you might be sure that there was no customer for me on 
the train. In a few months I was a seasoned guide. I had viewed 
myself as an amateur guide and a professional shopman, but 
now gradually I began to think of myself as a part-time shop- 
keeper and a full-time tourist guide. Even when I had no 
tourist to guide I did not go back to my shop, but to Gaffur 
on the fountain parapet, and listened to his talk about derelict 
automobiles. 

I had classified all my patrons. They were very varied, I can 
tell you. Some were passionate photographers; these men could 
never look at any object except through their view-finders. 
The moment they got down from the train, even before lift- 
ing their baggage, they asked, "Is there a place where they 
develop films?" 

"Of course, Malgudi Photo Bureau. One of the biggest . . ." 
"And if I want roll-films — I have, of course, enough stock 
with me, but if I run out . . . Do you think super-panchro 
three-color something-or-other is available there?" 
"Of course. That's his special line." 
"Will he develop and show me a print while I wait?" 
"Of course, before you count twenty — he is a wizard." 
"That is nice. Now, where are you going to take me first?" 

51 



These were routine questions from a routine type. I had all 
the satisfactory answers ready. I generally took time to answer 
the latter question as to where I was going .to take him first. It 
depended. I awaited the receipt of certain data before ventur- 
ing to answer. The data were how much time and money he 
was going to spend. Malgudi and its surroundings were my 
special show. I could let a man have a peep at it or a whole 
panorama. It was adjustable. I could give them a glimpse of a 
few hours or soak them in mountain and river scenery or 
archaeology for a whole week. I could not really decide how 
much to give or withhold until I knew how much cash the 
man carried or, if he carried a checkbook, how good it was. 
This was another deUcate point. Sometimes a traveler offered 
to write a check for this man or that, and, of course, our Gaffur 
or the photo store or the keeper of the forest bungalow on top 
of the Mempi Hills would not trust a stranger enough to ac- 
cept his check. I had to put off such an offer with the utmost 
delicacy by saying, "Oh, the banking system in our town is 
probably the worst you can think of. Sometimes they take 
twenty days to realize a check, but these poor fellows, how can 
they wait?" — rather a startling thing to say, but I didn't care if 
the banking reputation of our town suffered. 

As soon as a tourist arrived, I observed how he dealt with his 
baggage, whether he engaged a porter at all or preferred to 
hook a finger to each piece. I had to note all this within a split 
second, and then, outside, whether he walked to the hotel or 
called a taxi or haggled with the one-horse futka. Of course, I 
undertook all this on his behalf, but always with detachment. I 
did all this for him simply for the reason that he asked for 
Railway Raju the moment he stepped down on the platform 
and I knew he came with good references, whether he came 
from north or south or far or near. And at the hotel it was my 
business to provide him with the best room or the worst room, 
just as he might prefer. Those who took the cheapest dormi- 
tory said, "After all, it's only for sleeping, I am going to be 

52 



out the whole day. Why waste money on a room which is 
anyway going to be locked up all day? Don't you agree?" 

"Surely, yes, yes." I nodded, still without giving an answer 
to "Where are you going to take me first?" I might still be said 
to be keeping the man under probation, under careful scrutiny. 
I never made any suggestion yet. No use expecting a man to 
be clear-headed who is fresh from a train journey. He must 
wash, change his clothes, refresh himself with idli and coffee, 
and only then can we expect anyone in South India to think 
clearly on all matters of this world and the next. If he offered 
me any refreshment, I understood that he was a comparatively 
Uberal sort, but did not accept it until we were a Httle further 
gone in friendship. In due course, I asked him point-blank, 
"How much time do you hope to spend in this town?" 

"Three days at the most. Could we manage everything within 
the time?" 

"Certainly, although it all depends upon what you most wish 
to see." And then I put him in the confessional, so to speak. I 
tried to draw out his interests. Malgudi, I said, had many things 
to offer, historically, scenically, from the point of view of 
modem developments, and so on and so forth; or if one came 
as a pilgrim I could take him to a dozen temples all over the 
district within a radius of fifty miles; I could find holy waters 
for him to bathe in all along the course of the Sarayu, starting, 
of course, with its source on Mempi Peaks. 

One thing I learned in my career as a tourist guide was that 
no two persons were interested in the same thing. Tastes, as in 
food, differ also in sightseeing. Some people want to be seeing 
a waterfall, some want a ruin (oh, they grow ecstatic when 
they see cracked plaster, broken idols, and crumbhng bricks), 
some want a god to worship, some look for a hydroelectric 
plant, and some want just a nice place, such as the bungalow 
on top of Mempi with all-glass sides, from where you could 
see a hundred miles and observe wild game prowling around. 
Of those again there were two types, one the poet who was 

53 



content to watch and return, and the other who wanted to 
admire nature and also get drunk there. I don't know why it is 
so: a fine poetic spot like the Mempi Peak House excites in 
certain natures unexpected reactions. I know some who 
brought women there; a quiet, wooded spot looking over a 
valley one would think fit for contemplation or poetry, but it 
only acted as an aphrodisiac. Well, it was not my business to 
comment. My business stopped with taking them there, and to 
see that Gaffur went back to pick them up at the right time. 

I was sort of scared of the man who acted as my examiner, 
who had a complete list of all the sights and insisted on his 
money's worth. "What is the population of this town?" "What 
is the area?" "Don't bluff. I know when exactly that was built 
— it is not second-century but the twelfth." Or he told me the 
correct pronunciation of words. "R-o-u-t is not ..." I was 
meek, self-effacing in his presence and accepted his corrections 
with gratitude, and he always ended up by asking, "What is 
the use of your calling yourself a guide if you do not 
know . . . ?" et cetera, et cetera. 

You may well ask what I made out of all this? Well, there 
is no fixed answer to it. It depended upon the circumstances 
and the types of people I was escorting. I generally specified 
ten rupees as the minimum for the pleasure of my company, 
and a little more if I had to escort them far; over all this Gaffur, 
the photo stores, the hotel manager, and whoever I introduced 
a customer to expressed their appreciation, according to a cer- 
tain schedule. I learned while I taught and earned while I 
learned, and the whole thing was most enjoyable. 

There were special occasions, such as the trapping of an 
elephant herd. During the winter months the men of the Forest 
Department put through an elaborate scheme for trapping 
elephants. They watched, encircled, and drove a whole herd 
into stockades, and people turned up in great numbers to watch 
the operation. On the day fixed for the drive, people poured 
in from all over the country and applied to me for a ringside 

54 



seat in the spacious bamboo jungles of Mempi. I was supposed 
to have special influence with the men who were in charge of 
the drive: it meant several advance trips to the forest camp, 
and doing little services for the officials by fetching whatever 
they required from the town, and when the time came to ar- 
range for the viewing of the elephant-drive, only those who 
came with me were allowed to pass through the gates of the 
special enclosures. It kept all of us happy and busy and well 
paid. I escorted visitors in bunches and went hoarse repeating, 
"You see, the wild herd is watched for months . . ." and so 
forth. Don't imagine that I cared for elephants personally; 
anything that interested my tourists was also my interest. The 
question of my own preferences was secondary. If someone 
wanted to see a tiger or shoot one, I knew where to arrange 
it: I arranged for the lamb to bait the tiger, and had high plat- 
forms built so that the brave hunters might pop off the poor 
beast when it came to eat the lamb, although I never liked to 
see either the lamb or the tiger die. If someone wanted to see 
a king cobra spread out its immense hood, I knew the man 
who could provide the show. 

There was a girl who had come all the way from Madras 
and who asked the moment she set foot in Malgudi, "Can you 
show me a cobra — a king cobra it must be — which can dance 
to the music of a flute?" 

"Why?" I asked. 

*Td like to see one. That's all," she said. 

Her husband said, "We have other things to think of, Rosie. 
This can wait." 

"I'm not asking this gentleman to produce it at once. I am 
not demanding it. I'm just mentioning it, that's all." 

"If it interests you, you can make your own arrangements. 
Don't expect me to go with you. I can't stand the sight of a 
snake — your interests are morbid." 

I disliked this man. He was taunting such a divine creature. 
My sympathies were all for the girl — ^she was so lovely and 

55 



elegant. After she arrived I discarded my khaki bush coat and 
dhoti and took the trouble to make myself presentable. I wore 
a silk jibba and lace dhoti and groomed myself so well that my 
mother remarked when she saw me leave the house, "Ah, like 
a bridegroom!" and Gaffur winked and said many an insinuat- 
ing thing when I went to meet them at the hotel. 

Her arrival had been a sort of surprise for me. The man was 
the first to appear. I had put him up at the Anand Bhavan 
Hotel. After a day of sightseeing he suddenly said one after- 
noon, "I must meet the Madras train. Another person is com- 
ing." 

He didn't even stop to ask me what time the train would 
arrive. He seemed to know everything beforehand. He was a 
very strange man, who did not always care to explain what he 
was doing. If he had warned me that he was going to meet 
such an elegant creature at our station I should perhaps have 
decorated myself appropriately. As it was, I wore my usual 
khaki bush coat and dhoti, a horrible unprepossessing combina- 
tion at any time, but the most sensible and convenient for my 
type of work. The moment she got down from the train I 
wished I had hidden myself somewhere. She was not very glam- 
orous, if that is what you expect, but she did have a figure, a 
slight and slender one, beautifully fashioned, eyes that sparkled, 
a complexion not v/hite, but dusky, which made her only half 
visible — as if you saw her through a film of tender coconut 
juice. Forgive me if you find me waxing poetic. I gave some 
excuse and sent them off to the hotel, and stayed back to run 
home and tidy up my appearance. 

I conducted a brief research with the help of Gaffur. He 
took me to a man in Ellaman Street, who had a cousin working 
in the municipal office said to know a charmer with a king 
cobra. I carried on the investigation while I left the visitor to 
decipher episodes from Ramayan carved on the stone wall in 
Iswara Temple in North Extension — there were hundreds of 
minute carvings all along the wall. They kept the man fully 

56 



occupied as he stooped and tried to study each bit. I knew all 
those panels and could repeat their order blindfolded, but he 
spared me the labor, he knew all about it. 

When I returned from my brief investigation, I found the 
girl standing apart with every sign of boredom in her face. I 
suggested, *'lf you can come out for an hour, I can show you 
a cobra." 

She looked delighted. She tapped the man on the shoulder 
as he was stooping over the frieze and asked, "How long do 
you want to be here?" 

"At least two hours," he said without turning. 

"I'll go out for a while," she said. 

"Please yourself," he said. Then to me, "Go to the hotel 
direct. I'll find my way back." 

We picked up our guide at the municipal office. The car 
rolled along the sand, crossed the stretch at Nallappa's grove, 
and climbed the opposite bank, the entire route carved by the 
wheels of wooden bullock carts. Gaffur looked sourly at the 
man sitting by his side. "Do you want me to reduce this to a 
bullock cart, dragging us about these places? Where are we 
going? I see no other place than the cremation ground there," 
he said, pointing at the smoke above a forlorn walled area on 
the other side of the river. I didn't like such inauspicious words 
to be uttered before the angel in the back seat. I tried to cover 
them up hastily by saying something else aloud. 

We arrived at a group of huts on the other side of the river. 
Many heads peeped out of the huts as soon as our car stopped, 
and a few bare-bodied children came and stood around the car, 
gaping at the occupants. Our guide jumped out and went at a 
trot to the farthest end of the village street and returned with 
a man who had a red turban around his head, his only other 
piece of clothing being a pair of drawers. 

"This man has a king cobra?" I looked him up and down and 
said hesitantly, "Let me see it." 

At which the young boys said, "He has a very big one in his 

57 



house; it is true." And I asked the lady, "Shall we go and see 
it?" 

We set off. Gaffur said, "I'll stay here, otherwise these mon- 
keys will make short work of this automobile." 

I let the other two go forward and whispered to Gaffur, 
**Why are you in such a bad mood today, Gaffur? After all, 
you have gone over worse roads and never complained!" 

"I have new springs and shock-absorbers. You know what 
they cost?" 

"Oh, you will recover their cost soon; be cheerful." 

"What some of our passengers need is a tractor and not a 
motor car. That fellow!" He was vaguely discontented. I knew 
his wrath was not against us, but against our guide, because he 
said, "I think it will be good to make him walk back to the 
town. Why should anyone want to come so far to see a rep- 
tile?" I left him alone; it was no use trying to make him cheer- 
ful. Perhaps his wife had nagged him when he started out. 

The girl stood under the shade of a tree while the man 
prodded a snake to make it come out of its basket. It was fairly 
large, and hissed and spread out its hood, while the boys 
screamed and ran off and returned. The man shouted at them, 
"If you excite it, it will chase you all!" 

I told the boys to keep quiet, and asked the man, "You are 
sure you will not let it slip through?" 

The girl suggested, "You must play on the flute, make it rear 
its head and dance." The man pulled out his gourd flute and 
played on it shrilly, and the cobra raised itself and darted hither 
and thither and swayed. The whole thing repelled me, but it 
seemed to fascinate the girl. She watched it swaying with the 
raptest attention. She stretched out her arm slightly and swayed 
it in imitation of the movement; she swayed her whole body to 
the rhythm — for just a second, but that was sufficient to tell me 
what she was, the greatest dancer of the century. 

It was nearly seven in the evening when we got back to the 
hotel. As soon as she got down, she paused to murmur a 

S8 



"Thanks'* to no one in particular and went up the staircase. 
Her husband, waiting at the porch, said, "That's all for the day. 
You could give me a consolidated account, I suppose, later. I 
shall want the car at ten o'clock tomorrow." He turned and 
went back to his room. 

I felt annoyed with him at this stage. What did he take me 
for? This fellow, telling me that he wanted the car at this hour 
or at that hour — did he think that I was a tout? It made me 
very angry, but the fact was that I really was a tout, having no 
better business than hanging around between Gaffur and a 
snake-charmer and a tourist and doing all kinds of things. The 
man did not even care to tell me anything about himself, or 
where he wanted to go on the following morning; an extraor- 
dinary fellow! 

A hateful fellow. I had never hated any customer so much 
before. I told Gaffur as we were driving back, "Tomorrow 
morning! He asks for the car as if it were his grandfather's 
property! Any idea where he wants to go?" 

"Why should I bother about it? If he wants the car he can 
have it if he pays for it. That is all. I don't care who pays for 
a thing as long as they engage me. . . ." He rambled on into a 
personal philosophy which I didn't care to follow. 

My mother waited for me as usual. While serving me food 
she said, "Where have you been today? What are the things 
you have done today?" 

I told her about the visit to the snake-charmer. She said, 
"They are probably from Burma, people who worship snakes." 
She said, "I had a cousin living in Burma once and he told me 
about the snake women there." 

"Don't talk nonsense. Mother. She is a good girl, not a snake- 
worshiper. She is a dancer, I think." 

"Oh, dancer! Maybe; but don't have anything to do with 
these dancing women. They are all a bad sort." I ate my food 
in silence, trying to revive in my mind the girl's scent-filled 
presence. 

59 



At ten next day I was at the hotel. Gaffur's car was already 
at the porch; he cried, "Aha! again," at the sight of me. "Big 
man! Hm, trying improvements!" His idiom was still as if he 
spoke of automobiles. He winked at me. 

I ignored everything and asked in a businesslike manner, 
"Are they in?" 

"I suppose so, they have not come out yet, that's all I know," 
said Gaffur. Twenty words where one would do. Something 
was wrong with him. He was becoming loquacious. And then 
I felt a sudden stab of jealousy as I realized that perhaps he too 
had been affected by the presence of the damsel and was desir- 
ous of showing off in her presence. I grew jealous and un- 
happy and said to myself, "If this is how Gaffur is going to 
conduct himself in the future, I shall get rid of him and find 
someone else, that's all." I had no use for a loquacious, nose- 
poking taxi-driver. 

I went upstairs to Room 28 on the second floor of the hotel 
and knocked authoritatively. "Wait," said the voice from in- 
side. It was the man's, not the girl's, as I had hoped. I waited 
for a few minutes and fretted. I looked at my watch. Ten 
o'clock. And this man said, "Wait." Was he still in bed with 
her? It was a fit occasion, as it seemed to me, to tear the door 
down and go in. The door opened, and he came out, dressed 
and ready. He shut the door behind him. I was aghast. I was on 
the point of demanding, "What about her?" But I checked my 
impulse. I went sheepishly down with him. 

He gave me a look of approval, as if I had dressed to please 
him. Before getting into the car he said, "Today I want to 
study those friezes again for a short while." 

"All right, all right," I thought, "study the friezes or what- 
ever else you like. Why do you want me for that?" 

As if in answer to my thoughts, he said, "After that — " He 
took out of his pocket a piece of paper and read. 

This man would go on wall-gazing all his life and leave her 
to languish in her hotel room. Strange man! Why did he not 
60 



bring her along with him? Probably he was absent-minded. I 
asked, "Is no one else coming?" 

"No," he replied curtly, as if understanding my mind. He 
looked at the paper in his hand and asked, "Are you aware of 
the existence of cave paintings in these parts?" 

I laughed off the question. "Of course, everyone does not 
have the taste to visit places like that, but there have been a 
few discriminating visitors who insisted on seeing them. But — 
but — it will take a whole day, and we may not be able to get 
back tonight." 

He went back to his room, returned after a few minutes 
with a downcast face. Meanwhile I, with Gaffur's help, calcu- 
lated the expense involved in the trip. We knew that the path 
lay past the Peak House forest bungalow. One would have to 
halt there for the night and walk down a couple of miles. I 
knew where the caves were, but this was the first time I was 
going to set eyes on them. Malgudi seemed to unroll a new 
sightseeing place each time. 

The man sat back in the car and said, "You have probably 
no notion how to deal with women, have you?" 

I was pleased that he was becoming more human in his ap- 
proach. I said, "I have no idea," and laughed, thinking it might 
please him if I seemed to enjoy his joke. Then I made bold to 
ask, "What is the trouble?" My new dress and deportment gave 
me a new courage. In my khaki bush coat I would not have 
dared to take a seat beside him or talk to him in this way. 

He looked at me with what seemed a friendly smile. He 
leaned over and said, "If a man has to have peace of mind it is 
best that he forget the fair sex." This was the first time in our 
association of three days that he had talked to me so freely. He 
had always been curt and taciturn. I judged that the situation 
must be pretty grave if it unloosened his tongue to this extent. 

Gaffur sat in his seat with his chin in his hand. He was look- 
ing away from us. His whole attitude said, "I am sorry to be 
wasting my morning with such time-killers as you two." A 

6i 



courageous idea was developing in my head. If it succeeded it 
would lead to a triumphant end, if it failed the man might 
kick me out of his sight or call the police. I said, "Shall I go 
and try on your behalf?" 

"Would you?" he asked, brightening up. "Go ahead, if you 
are bold enough." 

I didn't wait to hear further. I jumped out of the car and 
went up the steps four at a time. I paused at Number 28 to 
regain normal breath, and knocked. 

"Don't trouble me, I don't want to come with you. Leave 
me alone," came the girl's voice from within. 

I hesitated, wondering how to speak. This was my first inde- 
pendent speech with the divine creature. I might either make 
a fool of myself or win the heavens. How should I announce 
myself? Would she know my famous name? I said, "It's not 
he, but me." 

"What?" asked the sweet voice, puzzled and irritated. 

I repeated, "It is not him, but me. Don't you know my voice? 
Didn't I come with you yesterday to that cobra man? All night 
I didn't sleep," I added, lowering my voice and whispered 
through a chink in the door. "The way you danced, your form 
and figure haunted me all night." 

Hardly had I finished my sentence when the door half 
opened and she looked at me. "Oh, you!" she said, her eyes 
lighting up with understanding. 

"My name is Raju," I said. 

She scrutinized me thoroughly. "Of course, I know you." I 
smiled affably, my best smile, as if I had been asked for it by 
a photographer. She said, "Where is he?" 

"Waiting in the car for you. Won't you get ready and come 
out?" She looked disheveled, her eyes were red with recent 
tears, and she wore a faded cotton sari; no paint or perfume, but 
I was prepared to accept her as she was. I told her, "You may 
come out as you are and no one will mind it." And I added, 
"Who would decorate a rainbow?" 
62 



She said, "You think you can please me by all this? You 
think you can persuade me to change my mind?" 

"Yes," I said. "Why not?" 

"Why do you want me to go out with him? Leave me in 
peace," she said, opening her eyes wide, which gave me another 
opportunity to whisper close to her face, "Because life is so 
blank without your presence." 

She could have pushed my face back, crying, "How dare 
you talk like this!" and shut the door on me. But she didn't. 
She merely said, "I never knew you would be such a trouble- 
some man. Wait a minute, then." She withdrew into her room. 
I wanted to cry with all my being, "Let me in," and bang on 
the door, but I had the good sense to restrain myself. I heard 
footsteps and saw that her husband had come to see the results. 

"Well, is she coming or not? I am not prepared to waste 
all—" 

"Hush," I said. "She will be out in a moment. Please go back 
to the car." 

"Really!" He mutterd in amazement. "You are a wizard!" 
He noiselessly turned and went back to his car. Presently the 
lady did come out like a vision, and said, "Let us go. But for 
you I would have given you all a few surprises." 

"What?" 

"I would have taken the next train home." 

"We are going to a wonderful spot. Please be your usual 
su^eet self, for my sake." 

"All right," she said and went down the steps; I followed. 
She opened the door of the car, went straight in, and took her 
seat, as her husband edged away to make space for her. I came 
over to the other side and sat down beside him. I was not pre- 
pared to go and sit down beside Gaffur at this stage. 

Gaffur now turned his head to ask whether we might go. 
"We cannot return tonight if we are going to the Peak House." 

"Let us try and come back," the man pleaded. 

"We will try, but there is no harm in being prepared to stay 

63 



over if necessary. Take a change of clothing. No harm in it. 
I am asking Gaffur to stop at my house." 

The lady said, "Just a minute, please." She dashed upstairs 
and returned with a small suitcase. She said to the man, "I have 
your clothes too in this." 

The man said, "Very good," and smiled, and she smiled and 
in the laughter the tension of the morning partly disappeared. 
Still, there was some uneasiness in the air. 

I asked Gaffur to pull up at the railway station for a moment, 
the car facing away from my house. I didn't want them to see 
my house. "Just a moment, please." I dashed out. Directly the 
shop boy sighted me he opened his mouth to say something. I 
ignored him, dashed up to my house, picked up a bag, and ran 
out, saying, "I may stay out tonight. Don't wait," to my 
mother in the kitchen. 

We reached the Peak House at about four in the afternoon. 
The caretaker was delighted to see us. He was often rewarded 
by me unstintingly with my clients' money. I always made it 
a point to tell my clients beforehand, "Keep that caretaker in 
good humor and he'll look after you and procure for you even 
the most impossible articles." I repeated the formula now and 
the husband — he shall be referred to as Marco henceforth — 
said, "Go ahead and do it. I look to you to help us through. 
You know I have only one principle in life. I don't want to be 
bothered with small things. I don't mind the expense." 

I told Joseph, the caretaker, to get us food and foodstuffs 
from his village, two miles away. I asked Marco, "Will you 
leave some cash with me? I'll render accounts later. I need not 
worry you again and again for small payments.'* 

One could not foresee how he would react to such a request. 
He was unsteady — sometimes he announced aloud his indiffer- 
ence to money, next minute he'd suddenly show every symp- 
tom of miserliness and behave like an auditor, but ultimately 
he'd pay for everything if, as I discovered, he got a voucher 

64 



for payments. He would not yield an anna without a voucher, 
whereas if you gave him a slip of paper you could probably 
get him to write off his entire fortune. 

Now I knew the trick. As I found him stumbling for words, 
I said, "I'll see that you get proper receipts for every pay- 
ment." It pleased him; he opened his purse. 

I had to dispose of the taxi. Gaffur would come back on the 
following afternoon. I made Gaffur sign a receipt, and then 
gave some money to Joseph to fetch us food from a hotel 
in the village. Now that I was in charge of the arrange- 
ments, I had not much time to gaze on my beloved's face, al- 
though I was darting glances in her direction. 

"The caves are a mile off, down that way," Joseph said. "We 
can't go there now. Tomorrow morning. If you leave after 
breakfast, you can come back for lunch." 

The Peak House was perched on the topmost cliff on Mempi 
Hills — the road ended with the house; there was a glass wall 
covering the north veranda, through which you could view the 
horizon a hundred miles away. Below us the jungle stretched 
away down to the valley, and on a clear day you might see also 
the Sarayu sparkling in the sun and pursuing its own course far 
away. This was like heaven to those who loved wild surround- 
ings and to watch the game, which prowled outside the glass wall 
at nights. The girl was in ecstasy. Our house was surrounded 
with rich vegetation. She ran like a child from plant to plant 
with cries of joy, while the man looked on with no emotion. 
Anything that interested her seemed to irritate him. 

She suddenly halted, gazing on the sun-bathed plains thou- 
sands of feet below. I feared that when night came on she 
might get scared. We heard the jackals howling, and all kinds 
of grunts and roars. Joseph brought a hamper of food for us 
and left it on a table. He brought milk, coffee, and sugar, for 
the morning, and showed me where the coal stove was. 

The lady cried, "Nobody should get up till I call. I'll have 
coffee ready for everyone." 

65 



Joseph said, "Please lock the door inside," and added, "If you 
sit up on that veranda, you can watch tigers and others animals 
prowling about. But you must not make any noise; that's the 
secret of it." We watched Joseph pick up a lantern and go 
down the steps; we could see his lantern faintly light the foliage 
on the way and disappear. 

"Poor Joseph, how bold of him to go down alone!" the girl 
said, at which the husband replied casually, "Nothing surpris- 
ing. He has probably been bom and bred here. Do you know 
him?" he asked, turning to me. 

"Yes; he was born in that village and came to mind this place 
as a boy. He must be at least sixty years old." 

"How has he come to be a Christian?" 

"There was a mission somewhere here; missionaries go and 
settle down in all sorts of places, you know," I said. 

Joseph had given us two lamps, brass ones filled with kero- 
sene. One I kept on the kitchen table, and the other I gave the 
man for his room, leaving the rest of the building in darkness. 
Outside through the glass we could see the stars in the sky. We 
sat around the table. I knew where the plates were. I set them 
on the table and served food — or, rather, attempted to serve 
food. It was about seven-thirty in the evening. We had seen a 
gorgeous sunset. We had seen the purple play of color in the 
northern skies after that, and admired it; we saw the tops of 
the trees lit up by stray red rays even after the sun was out of 
view, and had found a common idiom to express our admira- 
tion. 

The man just followed us about. I had become so lyrical 
that he suddenly said, "Hey, Raju, so you are a poet too!" a 
compliment I accepted with becoming modesty. 

At dinner, I picked up a dish and tried to serve. She said, 
"No, no. Let me serve you both, and I will be the last to eat, 
like a good housewife." 

"Aha, that's a good idea," the man said jocularly. She ex- 
66 



tended her hand for me to pass the dish to her. But I insisted 
on doing it myself. She suddenly darted forward and forcibly 
snatched it away from my hand. Oh, that touch made my head 
reel for a moment. I didn't see anything clearly. Everything 
disappeared into a sweet, dark haze, as under chloroform. My 
memory dwelt on the touch all through the dinner: I was not 
aware what we were eating or what they were saying. I sat 
with bowed head. I was nervous to see her face and meet her 
looks. I don't recollect when we finished eating and when she 
took away the dishes. I was only conscious of her soft move- 
ments. My thoughts dwelt on her golden touch. A part of my 
mind went on saying, "No, no. It is not right. Marco is her 
husband, remember. It's not to be thought of." But it was im- 
possible to pull the thoughts back. "He may shoot you," said 
my wary conscience. "Has he a gun?" commented another 
part of my mind. 

After dinner she said, "Let us go to the glass veranda. I must 
watch the game. Do you think they will come out at this 
hour?" 

"Yes; if we are patient and lucky," I said. "But won't you be 
afraid? One has to wait in the dark." 

She laughed at my fears and invited Marco to go with 
her. But he said he wanted to be left alone. He pulled a 
chair to the lamp, took out his portfolio, and was soon lost 
in his papers. She said, "Shield your lamp. I don't want 
my animals to be scared off." She moved on light steps 
to the veranda, pulled up a chair, and sat down. On the way 
she had said to me, "Have you documents to see to?" 

"No, no," I said, hesitating midway between my room and 
hers. 

"Come along, then. Surely you aren't going to leave me to 
the mercy of prowling beasts?" I looked at the man to know 
what he would have to say, but he was absorbed in his papers. 
I asked, "Do you want anything?" 

67 



"No." 

"I'll be on the veranda." 

"Go ahead," he said without looking up from his papers. 

She sat close to the glass pane, intently looking out. I softly 
placed a chair beside her, and sat down. After a while she said, 
"Not a soul. Do animals come here at all, I wonder, or is it one 
of the usual stories?" 

"No, lots of people have seen them — " 

"What animals?" 

"Lions . . ." 

"Lions here?" she said and began laughing. "I have read they 
were only in Africa. But this is really — " 

"No; excuse me." I had slipped. "I meant tigers, and panthers, 
and bears, and sometimes elephants too are to be seen crossing 
the valley or coming for a drink of water at the pool." 

"I'm prepared to spend the whole night here," she said. "He 
will, of course, be glad to be left alone. Here at least we have 
silence and darkness, welcome things, and something to wait 
for out of that darkness." 

I couldn't find anything to say in reply. I was oversvhelmed 
by her perfume. The stars beyond the glass shone in the sky. 

"Can't an elephant break through the glass?" she asked, 
yawning. 

"No; there is a moat on the other side. They can't approach 
us." 

Bright eyes shone amidst the foliage. She pulled my sleeve 
and whispered excitedly, "Something — what can it be?" 

"Probably a panther," I said to keep up the conversation. 
Oh, the whispers, the stars, and the darkness — I began to 
breathe heavily with excitement. 

"Have you caught a cold?" she asked. 

I said, "No." 

"Why are you breathing so noisily?" 

I wanted to put my face close to her and whisper, "Your 
68 



dance was marvelous. You are gifted. Do it again sometime. 
God bless you. Won't you be my sweetheart?" But fortunately 
I restrained myself. Turning back, I saw that Marco had come 
on soft steps. "What luck?" he asked in a whisper. 

"Something came, but it's gone. Sit down, won't you?" I 
said, giving him the chair. He sat down, peering through tne 
glass. 

Next morning I found the atmosphere once again black and 
tense — all the vivacity of the previous evening was gone. When 
their room opened, only he came out, fully dressed and ready. 
I had made the coffee on the charcoal stove. He came over and 
mechanically held his hand out as if I were the man on the 
other side of a coffee bar. I poured him a cup of coffee. "Joseph 
has brought tiffin. Will you not taste it?" 

"No; let us be going. I'm keen on reaching the caves." 

"What about the lady?" I asked. 

"Leave her alone," he said petulantly. "I can't afford to be 
fooling around, wasting my time." In the same condition as 
yesterday! This seemed to be the spirit of their morning every 
day. How cordially he had come over and sat beside her last 
night in the veranda! How cordially they had gone into the 
hotel on that night! What exactly happened at night that made 
them want to tear at each other in the morning? Did they sit 
up in bed and fight, or did she fatigue him with a curtain lec- 
ture? I wanted to cry out, "Oh, monster, what do you do to 
her that makes her sulk like this on rising? What a treasure you 
have in your hand, without realizing its worth — like a monkey 
picking up a rose garland!" Then a thrilling thought occurred 
to me — probably she was feigning anger again, so that I might 
intercede. 

He put down his cup and said, "Now let us go." I was afraid 
to ask him again about his wife. He was swinging a small cane 
impatiently. Could it be that he had been using it on her at 
night? 

69 



Even in my wild state, I did not make the mistake of asking 
again, "Shall I call her?" as that might have led to a very seri- 
ous situation. I only asked, "Does she know about coffee?" 

"Yes, yes," he cried impatiently. "Leave it there; she'll take 
it. She has enough sense to look after herself." He waved the 
switch, and we started out. Only once did I turn my head to 
look back, in the hope that she might appear at the window 
and call us back. "Did I come all the way for this monster's 
company?" I asked myself as I followed him down the hill 
slope. How appropriate it would be if he should stumble and 
roll down hill! Bad thought, bad thought. He walked ahead of 
me. We were like a couple of African hunters — in fact, his 
dress, with his helmet and thick jacket, as I have akeady men- 
tioned, was that of a wild African shikari. 

Our path through grass and shrub led to the valley. The cave 
was halfway across it. I felt suddenly irritated at the speed of 
his walk, as if he knew the way, swinging his cane and hugging 
his portfolio. If he could show half the warmth of that hug 
elsewhere! I suddenly asked, "Do you know the way?" 

"Oh, no," he said. 

"You are leading me!" I said, putting into it all the irony 
I was capable of. 

He cried, "Oh!" looked confused, and said, stepping aside, 
"Well, lead us," and through an irrelevant association added, 
"kindly Hght." 

The entrance to the cave was beyond a thicket of lantana. A 
huge door on its rusty hinges stood open. And, of course, all 
the crumbling brick and plaster was there. It was a cave with 
a single rock covering its entire roof; why any man should 
have taken the trouble to build a thing like this in a remote 
spot was more than I could understand. 

He stood outside and surveyed the entrance. "You see, this 
entrance must have been a later improvisation; the cave itself, 
I know, must have been about first century a.d. The entrance 
and the door are of a later date. You see, that kind of tall en- 
70 



trance and the carved doorway became a current fashion in the 
seventh or eighth century, when the South Indian rulers be- 
came fond of . . ." He went on talking. Dead and decaying 
things seemed to unloosen his tongue and fire his imagination, 
rather than things that lived and moved and swung their limbs. 
I had little to do as a guide; he knew so much more of every- 
thing! 

When he passed in, he completely forgot the world outside 
and its inhabitants. The roof was low, but every inch of the 
wall space was covered with painted figures. He flashed a torch 
on the walls. He took out of his pocket a mirror and placed it 
outside to catch the sunlight and throw a beam on the paint- 
ings. Bats were whirring about; the floor was broken and full 
of holes. But he minded nothing. He became busy measuring, 
writing down, photographing, all the time keeping up a chat- 
ter, not bothered in the least whether I listened or not. 

I was bored with his ruin-collecting activities. The wall 
painting represented episodes from the epics and mythology, 
and all kinds of patterns and motifs, with men, women, and 
kings and animals, in a curious perspective and proportion of 
their own, and ancient like the rocks. I had seen hundreds like 
them, and I saw no point in seeing more. I had no taste for 
them, just as he had no taste for other things. 

"Be careful," I said. "There may be reptiles in those cracks." 

"Oh, no," he said indifferently; "reptiles don't generally 
come to such interesting places; moreover, I have this." He 
flourished his stick. "I can manage. I'm not afraid." 

I suddenly said, "I seem to hear the sound of a car. If it's 
Gaffur, I'd like to be there at the bungalow, so do you mind if 
I go? I'll be back." 

He said, "Keep him. Don't let him go away." 

"When you return, come the same way — ^so that we may 
not get lost." He didn't answer, but resumed his studies. 

I reached the house at a run and rested a while in the back 
yard to regain my breath. I went in, brushing back my hair 

71 



with my hand and composing my features. As I entered, I 
heard her voice. "Looking for me?" She was sitting on a boul- 
der in the shade of a tree. She must have seen me come up. 
"I saw you even half a mile away — but you couldn't see me," 
she said like one who had discovered a fault. 

"You were on the peak and I was in the valley," I said. I 
went up to her and made some polite inquiries about her coffee. 
She looked both sad and profound. I sat down on a stone near 
her. 

"You have returned alone. I suppose he is wall-gazing?" she 
said. 

"Yes," I replied briefly. 

"He does that everywhere." 

"Well, I suppose he is interested, that*s all." 

"What about me, interested in something else?" 

**What is your interest?" 

"Anything except cold, old stone walls," she said. 

I looked at my watch. I had already been away from him 
for nearly an hour. I was wasting time. Time was slipping 
through my fingers. If I were to make good, I should utilize 
this chance. "Every night you generally sit up and quarrel, do 
you?" I asked boldly. 

"When we are alone and start talking, we argue and quarrel 
over everything. We don't agree on most matters, and then 
he leaves me alone and comes back and we are all right, that's 
all." 

"Until it is night again," I said. 

"Yes, yes." 

"It's unthinkable that anyone should find it possible to quar- 
rel or argue with you — being with you must be such bliss.'* 

She asked sharply, "What do you mean?" 

I explained myself plainly. I was prepared to ruin myself 
today if need be, but I was going to talk and tell her. If she 
wanted to kick me out, she could do it after listening to me. 
I spoke my mind. I praised her dancing. I spoke out my love, 

72 



but sandwiched it conveniently between my appreciations of 
her art. I spoke of her as an artist in one breath, and continued 
in the next as a sweetheart. Something like, "What a glorious 
snake dance! Oh, I keep thinking of you all night. World's 
artist number one! Don't you see how I am pining for you 
every hour!" 

It worked. She said, "You are a brother to me" ("Oh, no," I 
wanted to cry), "and I'll tell you what happens." She gave me 
an account of their daily quarrels. 

"Why did you marry at all?" I asked recklessly. 

She remained moody and said, "I don't know. It just hap- 
pened." 

"You married him because of his wealth," I said, "and you 
were advised by your uncle and the rest." 

"You see," she began, plucking my sleeve. "Can you guess 
to what class I belong?" 

I looked her up and down and ventured, "The finest, what- 
ever it may be, and I don't believe in class or caste. You are an 
honor to your caste, whatever it may be." 

"I belong to a family traditionally dedicated to the temples 
as dancers; my mother, grandmother, and, before her, her 
mother. Even as a young girl, I danced in our village temple. 
You know how our caste is viewed?" 

"It's the noblest caste on earth," I said. 

**We are viewed as public women," she said plainly, and I 
was thrilled to hear the words. "We are not considered re- 
spectable; we are not considered civilized." 

"All that narrow notion may be true of old days, but it's 
different now. Things have changed. There is no caste or class 
today." 

"A different life was planned for me by my mother. She put 
me to school early in life; I studied well. I took my master's 
degree in economics. But after college, the question was 
whether I should become a dancer or do something else. One 
day I saw in our paper an advertisement — ^the usual kind you 

73 



may have seen: *Wanted: an educated, good-looking girl to 
marry a rich bachelor of academic interests. No caste restric- 
tions; good looks and university degree essential.' I asked my- 
self, 'Have I looks?' " 

"Oh, who could doubt it?** 

"I had myself photographed clutching the scroll of the uni- 
versity citation in one hand, and sent it to the advertiser. Well, 
we met, he examined me and my certificate, we went to a 
registrar and got married.** 

"Did you like him the moment you saw him?" 

"Don't ask all that now." She snubbed me. "We had had 
many discussions before coming to a decision. The question 
was, whether it would be good to marry so much above our 
wealth and class. But all the women in my family were im- 
pressed, excited that a man like him was coming to marry one 
of our class, and it was decided that if it was necessary to give 
up our traditional art, it was worth the sacrifice. He had a big 
house, a motor car, he was a man of high social standing; he 
had a house outside Madras, he was living in it all alone, no 
family at all; he lived with his books and papers.** 

"So you have no mother-in-law!" I said. 

"I'd have preferred any kind of mother-in-law, if it had 
meant one real, live husband,** she said. I looked up at her to 
divine her meaning, but she lowered her eyes. I could only 
guess. She said, "He is interested in painting and old art and 
things like that.** 

"But not one which can move its limbs, I suppose,** I said. 

I sighed deeply, overcome with the sadness of her life. I 
placed my hand on her shoulder and gently stroked it. "I am 
really very unhappy to think of you, such a gem lost to the 
world. In his place I would have made you a queen of the 
world." She didn't push away my hand. I let it travel and felt 
the softness of her ear and pushed my fingers through the locks 
of her hair. 

Gaffur's car did not turn up. A passing truck-driver brought 

74 



the message that it had had a breakdown and would be coming 
on the following day. No one in the party minded really. 
Joseph looked after us quite well. Marco said it gave him more 
time to study the walls. I did not mind. It gave me an occasion 
to watch the game beyond the sheet glass every night, holding 
her hand, while Marco sat in his room, poring over his notes. 

When Gaffur's car did turn up Marco said, "I want to stay 
on here; it is going to take more time than I thought. Could 
you fetch from my room in the hotel my black trunk? I have 
some papers in it. I'd prefer to have you here also, if it is all the 
same to you." 

I seemed to hesitate, and then looked up at the girl for a 
moment. There was a mute appeal in her eyes. I said yes. 

"You may treat it as a part of your professional work," he 
said, "unless you feel it's going to hurt your general business." 

"All right," I said hesitantly. "It's true, but I'd also like to be 
of service to you. Once I take charge of anyone, I always feel 
that they are my responsibility till I see them off again safely." 

As I was getting into the car she said to her husband, "I'll 
also go back to the town; I want a few things from my box.'* 

I added, "We may not be able to return tonight." 

He asked his wife, "Can you manage?" 

"Yes," she said. 

As we were going down the mountain road I often caught 
Gaffur looking at us through the mirror, and we moved away 
from the range of his vision. We reached our hotel in the eve- 
ning. I followed her to her room. "Should we go back this 
evening?" I asked her. 

"Why?" she asked. "Suppose Gaffur's car stops on the way? 
Better not risk it on that road. I'll stay here tonight." 

I went home to change. My mother was full of information 
the moment she saw me, and full of inquiries. I brushed every- 
thing aside. I rushed through my washing and grooming and 
took out another set of special clothes. I gave my old clothes in 
a bundle to my mother. "Will you tell that shop boy to take 

75 



them to the dhobi and have them washed and ironed neatly? 
I may want them tomorrow." 

"Becoming a dandy?" she said, surveying me. "Why are you 
always on the run now?" I gave her some excuse and started 
out again. 

I engaged Gaffur for my own rounds that day. I was a true 
guide. Never had I shown anyone the town with greater zest. 
I took Rosie all over the place, showed her the town hall tower 
— showed her Sarayu, and we sat on the sands and munched a 
large packet of salted nuts. She behaved like a baby — excited, 
thrilled, appreciative of everything. I took her through the 
Suburban Stores and told her to buy anything she liked. This 
was probably the first time that she was seeing the world. She 
was in ecstasies. Gaffur warned me when he got me alone for 
a moment outside the store, "She is a married woman, remem- 
ber." 

"What of it?" I said. "Why do you tell me this?" 

"Don't be angry, sir," he said. "Go slow; that is all I can 
say." 

"You are unhealthy-minded, Gaffur. She is like a sister to 
me," I said, and tried to shut him up. 

All he said was, "You are right. What is it to me? After all, 
that man is there, who has really married her. And I've my 
own wife to bother about." 

I left him and went back to the store. She had picked up a 
silver brooch, painted over and patterned hke a peacock. I 
paid for it and pinned it on her sari. We dined on the terrace 
of the Taj, from where she could have a view of the River 
Sarayu winding away. W^hen I pointed it out to her she said, 
"It's good. But I have had views of valleys, trees, and brooks 
to last me a lifetime." We laughed. We were getting into a 
state of perpetual giggling. 

She liked to loaf in the market, eat in a crowded hotel, wan- 
der about, see a cinema — these common pleasures seemed to 
have been beyond her reach all these days. I had dismissed 

76 



the car at the cinema. I did not want Gaffur to watch my 
movements. We walked to the hotel after the picture. We had 
hardly noticed what it was. I had taken a box. She wore a 
light yellow crepe sari which made her so attractive that people 
kept looking at her. 

Her eyes sparkled with vivacity and gratitude. I knew I had 
placed her in my debt. 

It was nearing midnight. The man at the hotel desk watched 
us pass without showing any interest. Desk-men at hotels learn 
not to be inquisitive. At the door of Number 28 I hesitated. She 
opened the door, passed in, and hesitated, leaving the door half 
open. She stood looking at me for a moment, as on the first 
day. 

"Shall I go away?" I asked in a whisper, 

"Yes. Good night," she said feebly. 

"May I not come in?" I asked, trying to look my saddest. 

"No, no. Go away," she said. But on an impulse I gently 
pushed her out of the way, and stepped in and locked the 
door on the world. 



77 



Chapter Six 



'<$x$>^«$x^<$>^^x$>^>^x$>^<^^x$>^x$>^H^ 



Raju lost count of the time that passed in these activities — one 
day being like another and always crowded. Several months 
(or perhaps years) had passed. He counted the seasons by the 
special points that jutted out, such as the harvest in January, 
when his disciples brought him sugar cane and jaggery cooked 
with rice; when they brought him sweets and fruits, he knew 
that the Tamil New Year was on; when Dasara came they 
brought in extra lamps and lit them, and the women were busy 
all through the nine days, decorating the pillared hall with 
colored paper and tinsel; and for Deepavali they brought him 
new clothes and crackers and he invited the children to a 
special session and fired the crackers. He kept a rough count 
of time thus, from the beginning of the year to its end, through 
its seasons of sun, rain, and mist. He kept count of three cycles 
and then lost count. He realized that it was unnecessary to 
maintain a calendar. 

His beard now caressed his chest, his hair covered his back, 
and around his neck he wore a necklace of prayer beads. His 
eyes shone with softness and compassion, the light of wisdom 
emanated from them. The villagers kept bringing in so many 
things for him that he lost interest in accumulation. He dis- 
tributed whatever he had to the gathering at the end of the 
day. They brought him huge chrysanthemum garlands, jasmine 
and rose petals in baskets. He gave them all back to the women 
and children. 

78 



He protested to Velan one day, "Pm a poor man and you 
are poor men; why do you give me all this? You must stop it/' 
But it was not possible to stop the practice; they loved to bring 
him gifts. He came to be called Swami by his congregation, and 
where he lived was called the Temple. It was passing into 
common parlance. "The Swami said this or that," or "I am 
on my way to the Temple." People loved this place so much 
that they lime-washed its walls and drew red bands on them. 

In the first half of the year they had evening rains, which 
poured down fussily for a couple of hours to the tune of tre- 
mendous thunder; later in the year they had a quieter sort of 
rain, steadily pattering down. But no rain affected the assembly. 
People came shielding themselves with huge bamboo mats or 
umbrellas or coconut thatch. The hall became more packed 
during the wet season, since the people could not overflow 
into the outer courtyard. But it made the gathering cozy, in- 
teresting, and cool; and the swish of rain and wind in the trees 
and the swelling river (which made them carry their children 
aloft on their shoulders and cross the river only at certain 
shallow points) lent a peculiar charm to the proceedings. Raju 
loved this season, for its greenness everywhere, for the variety 
of cloud-play in the sky, which he could watch through the 
columned halls. 

But he suddenly noticed at the end of the year that the skies 
never dimmed with cloud. The summer seemed to continue. 
Raju inquired, "Where are the rains?" 

Velan pulled a long face. "The first rains have totally kept 
off, Swamiji; and the millet crop, which we should have har- 
vested by now, is all scorched on the stalks. It's a big worry." 

"A thousand banana seedlings are dead," said another. "If it 
continues, who knows?" They looked anxious. 

Raju, ever a soothsayer, said consolingly, "Such things are 
common; don't worry too much about them. Let us hope for 
the best." 

They became argumentative. "Do you know, Swamiji, our 

79 



cattle which go out to graze nose about the mud and dirt and 
come back, having no grass to eat? " 

Raju had some soothing remark for every complaint. They 
went home satisfied. "You know best, master," they said and 
left. Raju recollected that for his bath nowadays he had to go 
down three more steps to reach the water. He went down and 
stood looking along the river course. He looked away to his 
left, where the river seemed to wind back to the mountain 
ranges of the Mempi, to its source, where he had often con- 
ducted tourists. Such a small basin, hardly a hundred square feet 
with its little shrine — what had happened there to make this 
river shrink so much here? He noticed that the borders were 
wide, more rocks were showing, and the slope on the other 
side seemed to have become higher. 

Other signs too were presently to be noticed. At the Harvest 
Festival, the usual jubilation was absent. "Sugar canes have 
completely wilted; with difficulty we have brought in this bit. 
Please accept it," 

"Give it to the children," Raju said. Their gifts were shrink- 
ing in size and volume. 

"The astrologer says that we shall have very early rains in 
the coming year," someone said. The talk was always about the 
rains. People listened to discourses and philosophy with only 
half-interest. They sat around, expressing their fears and hopes. 
"Is it true, Swami, that the movement of airplanes disturbs 
the clouds and so the rains don't fall? Too many airplanes 
in the sky." "Is it true, Swami, that the atom bombs are re- 
sponsible for the drying up of the clouds?" Science, mythol- 
ogy, weather reports, good and evil, and all kinds of possibilities 
were connected with the rain. Raju gave an explanation for 
each in the best manner he could manage, but he found his 
answers never diverted their minds. 

He decreed, "You must not think too much of it. The rain 
god sometimes teases those who are obsessed with thoughts of 
80 



I 



him. How would you feel if someone went on mentioning 
and repeating your name all hours of the day and night for 
days and days on end?" They enjoyed the humor of the anal- 
ogy, and went their ways. But a situation was developing which 
no comforting word or discipline of thinking could help. Some- 
thing was happening on a different plane over which one had 
no control or choice, and where a philosophical attitude made 
no difference. Cattle were unable to yield milk; they lacked 
the energy to drag the plow through the furrows; flocks of 
sheep were beginning to look scurvy and piebald, with their 
pelvic bones sticking out. 

The wells in the villages were drying up. Huge concourses 
of women with pitchers arrived at the river, which was fast 
narrowing. From morning to night they came in waves and 
took the water. Raju watched their arrival and departure as 
they passed in files on the high ground opposite, looking 
picturesque, but without the tranquillity inherent in a picture. 
They quarreled at the water-hole for priorities, and there were 
fear, desperation, and lamentation in their voices. 

The earth was fast drying up. A buffalo was found dead on 
a foot-track. The news was brought to the Swami early one 
morning by Velan. He stood above him as he slept and said, 
"Swami, I want you to come with us." 

"Why?" 

"Cattle have begun to die," he said with quiet resignation. 

"What can I do about it?" Raju felt like asking, sitting up in 
his bed. But he could not say such a thing. He said soothingly, 
"Oh, no; it can't be." 

"A buffalo was found dead on the forest path beyond our 
village." 

"Did you see it yourself?" 

"Yes, Swami, I come from there.** 

"Can't be as bad as that, Velan. It must have died of some 
other disease." 

8i 



"Please come along and see it, and if you can tell us why it is 
dead, it will relieve our minds. A learned man like you should 
see and tell." 

They were clearly losing their heads. They were entering 
a nightmare phase. The Swami knew so little of cattle, dead 
or alive, that it was of no practical use his going to see this 
one, but since they wanted it, he asked Velan to be seated for a 
few moments, and went down with him. The village street 
looked deserted. Children played about in the road dust, be- 
cause the master had gone to town with a petition for relief 
addressed to the revenue authorities, and so the day school 
was closed. Women were moving about with water pots on 
their heads. In passing, "Could hardly get half a pot today," 
said some. "What's the world coming to.^ You must show us 
the way, Swami." 

Raju merely raised a hand and waved it as if to say, "Be 
peaceful; everything will be all right; I will fix it with the 
gods." A small crowd followed him and Velan to the forest 
path, saying the same thing over and over again. Someone re- 
ported worse happenings in the next village; cholera was break- 
ing out and thousands were dying, and so forth; he was snubbed 
by the rest as a scaremonger. Raju paid little attention to the 
jabber around him. 

There it was outside the village, on a rough foot-track that 
led into the forest, a buffalo with bones sticking out. Crows 
and kites, already hovering about, flew off at the approach of 
men. There was a sickening odor, and henceforth Raju began 
to associate the season with it. It could not be mitigated with 
soothsaying. He held his upper cloth to his nostrils and gazed 
at the carcass for a while. "Whose was this?" he asked. 

They looked at one another. "Not ours," someone said. "It 
belonged to the next village." Their was some relief at this 
thought. If it was one from the next village, it was far removed. 
Anything, any explanation, any excuse served to console people 
now. 
Sz 



"It belonged to no one," said another. "It looks like a wild 
buffalo." 

This was even better. Raju felt relieved at the possibility of 
there being other solutions and explanations. He added, peering 
at it again, "It must have been bitten by a poisonous insect." 
This was a comforting explanation, and he turned back with- 
out letting his eye dwell on the barren branches of trees, and 
the ground covered with bleached mud without a sign of green. 

This piece of interpretation by the Swamiji pleased the 
public. It brought them untold comfort. The air of tension 
suddenly relaxed. When the cattle were penned for the night, 
they looked on them without anxiety. "There is enough about 
for the cattle to feed on," they said. "Swami says that the 
buffalo died of a poisonous bite. He knows." In support of it, 
many anecdotes were told of the death of animals from mys- 
terious causes. "There are snakes which bite into their hoofs." 
"There are certain kinds of ants whose bite is fatal to animals." 

More cattle were found dead here and there. When the earth 
was scratched it produced only a cloud of fine dust. The 
granary of the previous year, in most of the houses, remained 
unreplenished and the level was going down. The village 
shopman was holding out for bigger prices. When people asked 
for a measure of rice he demanded fourteen annas for it. The 
man who wanted the rice lost his temper and slapped his face. 
The shopman came out with a chopper and attacked the cus- 
tomer; and those who sympathized with the man gathered in 
front of the shop and invaded it. The shopman's relatives and 
sympathizers came at night with crowbars and knives and 
started attacking the other group. 

Velan and his men also picked up axes and knives and started 
out for the battle. Shrieks and cries and imprecations filled the 
air. The little hay that was left was set on fire, and the dark night 
was ablaze. Raju heard the cries, coming on the night air, and 
then he saw the blaze lighting up the landscape beyond the 
mound. Only a few hours before, everything had seemed peace- 

83 



ful and quiet. He shook his head, saying to himself, "The 
village people do not know how to remain peaceful. They are 
becominor more and more ao^itated. At this rate, I think I'll look 
for a new place." He went back to sleep, unable to take any 
further interest in their activities. 

But news was brought to him early in the morning. Velan's 
brother told him while he was still half asleep that Velan was 
down with an injured skull and burns, and he gave a list of 
women and children hurt in the fight. They were mustering 
themselves to attack the other group tonight. 

Raju was amazed at the way things were moving. He did not 
know what he was expected to do now, whether to bless their 
expedition or prevent it. Personally, he felt that the best thing 
for them would be to blow one another's brains out. That'd 
keep them from bothering too much about the drought. He 
felt a pity for Velan's condition. "Is he seriously hurt?" he 
asked. 

Velan's brother said, "Oh, no. Just cut up here and there," 
as though he wasn't satisfied with the marks. 

Raju wondered for a while whether he should visit Velan, 
but he felt a tremendous reluctance to move. If Velan was 
hurt, he'd get healed; that was all. And no\\^ the brother's 
description of the injuries, whether false or true, suited his 
program. There was no urgency to go and see Velan. He feared 
that if they made it a habit he would not be left in peace, as 
the villagers would always have a reason to call him out. He 
asked Velan's brother, "How did you yourself manage to re- 
main intact?" 

"Oh, I was also there, but they didn't hit me. If they had I 
would have laid ten of them low. But my brother, he was 
careless." 

"Thin as a broomstick, but talks like a giant," thought Raju, 
and advised, "Tell your brother to apply tumeric to his 
wounds." From the casual tone with which this man was 
speaking, Raju wondered if it was possible that he himself 

84 



had dealt a blow to Velan from behind; anything seemed pos- 
sible in this village. All the brothers in the place were involved 
in litigation against one another; and anyone might do anything 
in the present sensational developments. Velan's brother rose 
to go. Raju said, "Tell Velan to rest in bed completely." 

"Oh, no, master. How can he rest? He is joining the party 
tonight and he will not rest till he burns their houses." 

"It is not right," Raju said, somewhat irritated by all this 
pugnacity. 

Velan's brother was one of the lesser intelligences of the 
village. He was about twenty-one, a semi-moron, who had 
grown up as a dependent in Velan's house, yet another of 
Velan's trials in life. He spent his days taking the village cattle 
out to the mountains for grazing: he collected them from vari- 
ous houses early in the day, and drove them to the mountain- 
side, watched over them, and brought them back in the eve- 
ning. All day he lounged under a tree shade, eating a ball of 
boiled millet when the sun came overhead, and watching for 
the sun to slant westward to drive the cattle homeward. He 
had hardly anyone to speak to except his cattle the whole day 
and he spoke to them on equal terms and abused them and 
their genealogy unreservedly. Any afternoon in the stillness of 
the forest, if one had the occasion to observe, one could hear 
the hills echoing to the choice, abusive words that he hurled 
at the animals as he followed them with his stick. He was con- 
sidered well equipped for this single task, and from each house 
was given four annas a month. They did not trust him with 
any more responsible tasks. He was one of those rare men in 
the village who never visited the Swamiji, but preferred to 
sleep at home at the end of the day. But now he had come, 
almost for the first time. The others were preoccupied and 
busy with their preparations for the coming fight, and he was 
one of those whose employment was affected by the drought; 
no one saw any sense in sending the cattle out to nose about 
the dry sand and paying the idiot four annas a month. 

85 



He had come here this morning, not because anyone had sent 
him to carry a message for the Swamiji, but because he was at 
a loose end and had suddenly felt that he might as well pay 
a visit to the temple and receive the Swami's blessing. The 
fight was the last thing the villagers would have liked to bring 
to the Swami's attention, although after finishing it they might 
have given him a mild version. But this boy brought the news 
on his own initiative and defended their action. "But, Swami, 
why did they cut my brother's face?" He added sullenly, 
"Should they be left free to do all this?" 

Raju argued with him patiently. "You beat the shopman 
first, didn't you?" 

The boy took it literally and said, "I didn't beat the shop- 
man. The man who beat him was . . ." He gave a number of 
local names. 

Raju felt too weary to correct him and improve his under- 
standing. He simply said, "It is no good; nobody should fight." 
He felt it impossible to lecture him on the ethics of peace, 
and so merely said, "No one should fight." 

"But they fight!" the boy argued. "They come and beat us." 
He paused, ruminating upon the words, and added, "And they 
will kill us soon." 

Raju felt bothered. He did not like the idea of so much com- 
motion. It might affect the isolation of the place and bring the 
police on the scene. He did not want anyone to come to the 
village. Raju suddenly began to think positively on these 
matters. He gripped the other's arm above his elbow and said, 
"Go and tell Velan and the rest that I don't want them to fight 
like this. I'll tell them what to do later." The boy prepared 
himself to repeat his usual arguments. But Raju said impatiently, 
"Don't talk. Listen to what I say." 

"Yes, master," the boy said, rather frightened at this sudden 
vehemence. 

"Tell your brother, immediately, wherever he may be, that 
unless they are good I'll never eat." 
86 



"Eat what?" asked the boy, rather puzzled. 

"Say that I'll not eat. Don't ask what. I'll not eat till they 
are good." 

"Good? Where?" 

This was frankly beyond the comprehension of the boy. He 
wanted to ask again, "Eat what?" but refrained out of fear. 
His eyes opened wide. He could not connect the fight and 
this man's food. He wanted only to be released from the ter- 
rific grip over his left elbow. He felt he had made a mistake in 
coming to this man all alone — the bearded face, pushed so close 
to him, frightened him. This man might perhaps eat him up. 
He became desperately anxious to get out of the place. He 
said, "All right, sir. I'll do it," and the moment Raju let his 
hold go he shot out of the place, was across the sands and out 
of sight in a moment. 

He was panting when he ran into the assembly of his village 
elders. They were sitting solemnly around a platform in the 
center of the village, discussing the rains. There was a brick 
platform built around an ancient peepul tree, at whose root a 
number of stone figures were embedded, which were often 
anointed with oil and worshiped. This was a sort of town-hall 
platform for Mangala. It was shady and cool and spacious; 
there was always a gathering of men on one side conferring 
on local problems, and on the other women who carried loaded 
baskets on their heads and rested; children chased each other; 
and the village dogs slumbered. 

Here were sitting the elders of the village, discussing the 
rain, the fight tonight, and all the strategies connected with it. 
They had still many misgivings about the expedition. How the 
Swami would view the whole thing was a thing that could be 
understood only later. He might not approve. It would be best 
not to go to him until they themselves were clear in their 
heads about what to do. That the other group deserved punish- 
ment was beyond question. Among those talking were quite a 
number with bruises and cuts. But they had a fear of the police; 

87 



they remembered a former occasion when there had been a 
faction fight, and the government posted a police force almost 
permanently and made the villagers feed them and pay for their 
keep. 

Into this council of war burst Velan's brother. The at- 
mosphere became tense. "What is it, brother?" asked Velan. 

The boy stopped to recover breath before speaking. They 
took him by the shoulder and shook him, at which he became 
more confused and blabbered and finally said, "The Swami, the 
Swami, doesn't want food any more. Don't take any food to 
him." 

"Why? Why?" 

"Because, because — it doesn't rain." He added also, suddenly, 
recollecting the fight, "No fight, he says." 

"Who asked you to go there?" asked his brother authori- 
tatively. 

"I — I didn't, but when I — found myself there he asked me 
and I told him — " 

"What did you tell him?'* 

The boy became suddenly wary. He knew he would be 
thrashed if he said he had mentioned the fight. He didn't like 
to be gripped by the shoulder — in fact, he was averse to being 
gripped in any manner at all; but there the Swami squeezed 
his elbow and brushed his beard on his face, and here these 
men were tearing at his shoulder. He felt sorry he had ever got 
involved. It was best not to have anything to do with them. 
They would wrench his shoulder off if they knew he'd been 
telling the master about the fight. So he covered up the entire 
business in the best manner he could think of. He blinked. 
They demanded of him again, "What did you tell him?" 

"That there is no rain," he said, mentioning the easiest sub- 
ject that occurred to him. 

They patted him on the head and said contemptuously, "Big 
prophet to carry the news! He didn't know about it till then, 
88 



I suppose." A laugh followed. The boy also simpered and tried 
to get over it. 

Then he remembered the message he had been entrusted 
with, and thought it safer to say something about it, otherwise 
the great man might come to know of it and lay a curse on 
him. And so he said, coming back to the original starting 
point, "He wants no food until it is all right." 

He uttered it with such solemnity and emphasis that they 
asked, "What did he say? Tell us exactly." 

The boy deliberated for a moment and said, " *Tell your 
brother not to bring me any more food. I won't eat. If I don't 
eat, it'll be all right; and then everything will be all right.' " 
They stared at him, puzzled. He smiled, rather pleased at the 
importance he was receiving. They remained in thought for a 
moment. 

And then one of them said, "This Mangala is a blessed coun- 
try to have a man like the Swami in our midst. No bad thing 
will come to us as long as he is with us. He is like Mahatma. 
When Mahatma Gandhi went without food, how many things 
happened in India! This is a man like that. If he fasts there will 
be rain. Out of his love for us he is undertaking it. This will 
surely bring rain and help us. Once upon a time a man fasted 
for twenty-one days and brought down the deluge. Only great 
souls that take upon themselves tasks such as this — " The at- 
mosphere became electrified. They forgot the fight and all their 
troubles and bickerings. 

The village was astir. Everything else seemed inconsequen- 
tial now. Someone brought the news that upstream a crocodile 
had been found dead on the sand, having no watery shelter and 
being scorched by the sun. Someone else came with the news 
that the fast-drying lake bed in a nearby village was showing 
up an old temple which had been submerged a century ago, 
when the lake was formed. The image of God was still intact 
in the inner shrine, none the worse for having lain under water 

89 



so long; the four coconut trees around the temple were still 
there. . . . And so on and so forth. More and more details 
were coming in every hour. Hundreds of people were now 
walking across the lake bed to visit the temple, and some care- 
less ones lost their lives, sucked in by loose mud. All this now 
produced a lot of public interest, but no fear. They were now 
even able to take a more lenient view of the shopman who had 
assaulted his customer. "After all, so and so should not have 
called him a whoreson; not a proper word." 

"Of course, one's kith and kin are bound to support one. 
What are they worth otherwise?" Velan brooded over the cut 
on his forehead, and a few others suddenly recollected their 
various injuries. They could not decide how far this could be 
forgiven. They consoled themselves with the thought that a 
good number in the other group must also be nursing injuries 
at that moment; it was a very satisfying thought. They sud- 
denly decided that they should have a third party to come 
and arbitrate, so that the fight could be forgotten, provided 
the other group paid for the burned-down haystacks and 
entertained the chief men of this group at a feast. And they 
spent their time discussing the conditions of peace and rose in 
a body, declaring, "Let us all go and pay our respects to Swami, 
our savior." 

Raju was waiting for his usual gifts and food. He had, no 
doubt, fruits and other edible stuff left in his hamper, but he 
hoped they would bring him other fare. He had suggested to 
tliem that they should try to get him wheat flour, and rice 
flour, and spices. He wanted to try some new recipes, for a 
change. He had a subtle way of mentioning his special require- 
ments. He generally began by taking Velan aside and saying, 
"You see, if a little rice flour and chili powder could be got, 
along with some other things, I can do something new. On 
Wednesdays . . ." He enunciated some principle of living such 
as that on a special Wednesday he always liked to make his 
90 



I 



food with rice flour and such-and-such spice, and he mentioned 
it with an air of seriousness so that his listeners took it as a 
spiritual need, something of the man's inner discipline to keep 
his soul in shape and his understanding with the Heavens in 
order. He had a craving for bonda, which he used to eat in 
the railway-station stall when a man came there to vend his 
edibles on a wooden tray to the travelers. It was composed 
of flour, potato, a slice of onion, a coriander leaf, and a green 
chili — and oh! how it tasted! — although he probably fried it 
in anything; he was the sort of vender who would not hesitate 
to fry a thing in kerosene, if it worked out cheaper. With all 
that, he made delicious stuff, and when Raju used to ask the 
vender how he made it, he gave him a recipe starting with, 
"Just a small piece of ginger," and then it went on to this and 
that. While discoursing on Bhagavad-Gita to his audience the 
other evening, Raju had had a sudden craving to try this out 
himself — he was now equipped with a charcoal stove and fry- 
ing pan, and what could be more musical than well-kneaded 
dough dropping into boiling oil? He had enumerated his wants 
to Velan as delicately as possible. 

When he heard voices beyond the mound, he felt relieved. 
He composed his features for his professional role and smoothed 
out his beard and hair, and sat down in his seat with a book in 
his hand. As the voices approached, he looked up and found 
that a bigger crowd than usual was crossing the sands. He was 
puzzled for a second, but felt that perhaps they were jubilant 
over the fact that he had prevented a fight. He felt happy that 
he had after all achieved something, and saved the village. That 
idiot brother of Velan did not seem so bad after all. He hoped 
that they had the flour in a bag. It'd be improper to ask for it 
at once; they were bound to leave it in the kitchen. 

They softened their steps and voices as they came nearer the 
pillared hall. Even the children hushed their voices when they 
approached the august presence. 

They sat around in a silent semicircle as before, each in his 

91 



place. The women got busy at once sweeping the floor and 
filling the mud lamps with oil. For ten minutes Raju neither 
looked at them nor spoke, but turned the leaves of his book. 
He felt curious to see how much of V^elan's person was intact. 
He stole a glance across, and saw the scars on his forehead, 
and threw a swift look around and found that actually there 
was less damage than he had pictured in his mind. He resumed 
his studies, and only after he had gone through ten minutes of 
reading did he look up as usual and survey the gathering. He 
looked at his flock, fixed his eyes on Velan in particular, and 
said, "Lord Krishna says here — " He adjusted his page to the 
light and read a passage. "Do you know what it means?" He 
entered into a semiphilosophical discourse on a set of rambling 
themes, starting v^'ith the eating of good food and going on to 
absolute trust in God's goodness. 

They listened to him without interrupting him, and only 
when he paused for breath at the end of nearly an hour did 
Velan say, "Your prayers will surely be answered and save our 
village. Every one of us in the village prays night and day that 
you come through it safely." 

Raju was puzzled by what he heard. But he thought that 
such high and bombastic well-wishing was their habit and 
idiom and that they were only thanking him for putting enough 
sense into their heads not to go on with their fight. The as- 
sembly grew very loquacious and showered praise on him from 
all directions. A woman came up and touched his feet. Another 
followed. Raju cried, "Have I not told you that I'll never per- 
mit this? No human being should ever prostrate before another 
human being." 

Two or three men came up, one of them saying, "You are 

not another human beincr. You are a Mahatma. We should 

o 

consider ourselves blessed indeed to be able to touch the dust 
of your feet." 

"Oh, no. Don't say that — " Raju tried to withdraw his feet. 
But they crowded round him. He tried to cover his feet. He 

92 



felt ridiculous playing this hide-and-seek with his feet. He 
could find no place to put them. They tugged at him from 
various sides and they seemed ready to tickle his sides, if it 
would only give them his feet. He realized that there was really 
no escape from this demonstration and that it would be best 
to let them do what they liked. Almost everyone in the crowd 
had touched his feet and withdrawn, but not too far away; they 
surrounded him and showed no signs of moving. They gazed 
on his face and kept looking up in a new manner; there was a 
greater solemnity in the air than he had ever known before. 

Velan said, "Your penance is similar to Mahatma Gandhi's. 
He has left us a disciple in you to save us." In their own rugged 
idiom, in the best words they could muster, they were thanking 
him. Sometimes they all spoke together and made a confused 
noise. Sometimes they began a sentence and could not get 
through with it. He understood that they spoke with feeling. 
They spoke gratefully, although their speech sounded bom- 
bastic. The babble was confusing. But their devotion to him 
was unquestionable. There was so much warmth in their ap- 
proach that he began to feel it was but right they should touch 
his feet; as a matter of fact, it seemed possible that he himself 
might bow low, take the dust of his own feet, and press it to 
his eyes. He began to think that his personality radiated a 
glory. . . . The crowd did not leave at the usual hour, but 
lingered on. 

Velan had assumed that he was on a fast today and for the 
first time these months had failed to bring in any food. Just 
as well. When they attached so much value to his fasting he 
could not very well ask, "Where is the stuff for my bondaV^ 
It would be unseemly. No harm in attending to it later. They 
had assumed that he was fasting in order to stop their fight, 
and he was not going to announce to them that he had already 
had two meals during the day. He would just leave it at that, 
and even if his eyes should droop a little out of seeming fatigue, 
it would be quite in order. Now that it was all over, why 

93 



couldn't they go away? He signed to Velan to come nearer, 
"Why not send away the women and children? Isn't it getting 
late?" 

The crowd left at nearly midnight, but Velan remained 
where he had sat all the evening, leaning against a pillar. "Don't 
you feel sleepy?" Raju asked. 

"No, sir. Keeping awake is no big sacrifice, considering what 
you are doing for us." 

"Don't attach too much value to it. It's just a duty, that is 
all, and I'm not doing anything more than I ought to do. You 
can go home if you like." 

"No, sir. I'll go home tomorrow when the Headman comes 
to relieve me. He will come here at five o'clock and stay on till 
the afternoon. I'll go home, attend to my work, and come back, 
sir." 

"Oh, it's not at all necessary that someone should always be 
here. I can manage quite well." 

"You will graciously leave that to us, sir. We are only doing 
our duty. You are undertaking a great sacrifice, sir, and the 
least we can do is to be at your side. We derive merit from 
watching your face, sir." 

Raju felt really touched by this attitude. But he decided that 
the time had come to get to the bottom of it. So he said, "You 
are right. 'One who serves the performer of a sacrifice derives 
the same merit,' says our scripture, and you are not wrong. I 
thank God that my effort has succeeded, and you are all at 
peace with one another; that's my main concern. Now that's 
over, things are all right. You may go home. Tomorrow I'll 
take my usual food, and then I shall be all right. You will re- 
member to fetch me rice flour, green chili, and — " 

Velan was too respectful to express his surprise loudly. But 
he couldn't check himself any more. "Do you expect it to rain 
tomorrow, sir?" 

"Well . . ." Raju thought for a moment. What was this new 
subject that had crept into the agenda? "Who can say? It's 

94 



God's will. It may." It was then that Velan moved nearer and 
gave an account of what his brother had told them, and its 
effect on the population around. Velan gave a very clear ac- 
count of what the savior was expected to do — stand in knee- 
deep water, look to the skies, and utter the prayer lines for 
two weeks, completely fasting during the period — and lo, the 
rains would come down, provided the man who performed it 
was a pure soul, was a great soul. The whole countryside was 
now in a happy ferment, because a great soul had agreed to go 
through the trial 

The earnestness with which he spoke brought the tears to 
Raju's eyes. He remembered that not long ago he had spoken 
to them of such a penance, its value and technique. He had 
described it partly out of his head and partly out of traditional 
accounts he had heard his mother narrate. It had filled an eve- 
ning's program and helped him divert his audience's mind from 
the drought. He had told them, "When the time comes, every- 
thing will be all right. Even the man who would bring you the 
rain will appear, all of a sudden." They interpreted his words 
and applied them now to the present situation. He felt that he 
had worked himself into a position from which he could not 
get out. He could not betray his surprise. He felt that after all 
the time had come for him to be serious — to attach value to his 
own words. He needed time — and solitude to think over the 
whole matter. He got down from his pedestal; that was the 
first step to take. That seat had acquired a glamour, and as long 
as he occupied it people would not listen to him as to an 
ordinary mortal. He now saw the enormity of his own creation. 
He had created a giant with his puny self, a throne of authority 
with that slab of stone. He left his seat abruptly, as if he had 
been stung by a wasp, and approached Velan. His tone hushed 
with real humility and fear; his manner was earnest. Velan sat 
still as if he were a petrified sentry. 

"Listen to me, Velan; it is essential that I should be alone 
tonight. It is essential that I should be alone through the day 

95 



tomorrow too. And then come and see me tomorrow night. 
I'll speak to you tomorrow night. Until then neither you nor 
anyone else should see me." 

This sounded so mysterious and important that Velan got up 
without a word. "I'll see you tomorrow night, sir. Alone?" 

"Yes, yes; absolutely alone." 

"Very well, master; you have your own reasons. It is not for 
us to ask why or what. Big crowds will be arriving. I'll have 
men along the river to turn them back. It'll be difficult, but if it 
is your order it must be carried out." He made a deep obeisance 
and went away. Raju stood looking after him for a while. He 
went into an inner room which he was using as a bedroom, 
and laid himself down. His body was aching from too much 
sitting up the whole day; and he felt exhausted by the numerous 
encounters. In that dark chamber, as the bats whirred about 
and the far-off sounds of the village ceased, a great silence 
descended. His mind was filled with tormenting problems. He 
tried to sleep. He had a fitful, nightmare-ridden, thought- 
choked three hours. 

Did they expect him to starve for fifteen days and stand in 
knee-deep water eight hours? He sat up. He regretted having 
given them the idea. It had sounded picturesque. But if he had 
known that it would be applied to him, he might probably 
have given a different formula: that all villages should combine 
to help him eat bonda for fifteen days without a break. Up to 
them to see that the supply was kept up. And then the saintly 
man would stand in the river for two minutes a day, and it 
should bring down the rain sooner or later. His mother used 
to say, "If there is one good man anywhere, the rains would 
descend for his sake and benefit the whole world," quoting 
from a Tamil poem. It occurred to him that the best course 
for him would be to run away from the whole thing. He could 
walk across, catch a bus somewhere, and be off to the city, 
where they would not bother too much about him — just an- 
other bearded sadhu about, that was all. Velan and the rest 

96 



would look for him and conclude that he had vanished to the 
Himalayas. But how to do it? How far could he go? Anyone 
might spot him within half an hour. It was not a practical 
solution. They might drag him back to the spot and punish 
him for fooling them. It was not even this fear; he was perhaps 
ready to take the risk, if there was half a chance of getting 
away. . . . But he felt moved by the recollection of the big 
crowd of women and children touching his feet. He felt moved 
by the thought of their gratitude. He lit a fire and cooked his 
food, bathed in the river (at a spot where he had to scoop the 
sand and wait five minutes for the spring to fill his vessel), 
and gulped down a meal before anyone should arrive even 
accidentally. He kept a reserve of food, concealed in an inner 
sanctum, for a second meal at night. He thought suddenly that 
if they would at least leave him alone at night, he could make 
some arrangement and survive the ordeal. The ordeal then 
would be only standing knee-deep in water (if they could find 
it), muttering the litany for eight hours. (This he could suitably 
modify in actual practice.) It might give him cramps, but he'd 
have to bear it for a few days, and then he believed the rains 
would descend in their natural course sooner or later. He would 
not like to cheat them altogether about the fast if he could 
help it. 

When Velan arrived at night, he took him into his confi- 
dence. He said, "Velan, you have been a friend to me. You 
must listen to me now. What makes you think that I can bring 
the rain?" 

"That boy told us so. Did you not tell him so?" 

Raju hesitated without giving a direct reply. Perhaps even at 
this point he might have rectified the whole thing with a frank 
statement. Raju hesitated for a moment. By habit, his nature 
avoided the direct and bald truth even now. He replied dodg- 
ingly, "It's not that that I am asking. I want to know what 
has made you think so about me." 

Velan blinked helplessly. He did not quite understand what 

97 



the great man was implying. He felt that it must mean some- 
thing very noble, of course, but he was unable to answer the 
question. He said, "What else should we do?" 

"Come nearer. Sit down and listen to me. You may sleep 
here. I'm prepared to fast for the sake of your people and do 
anything if I can help this country — but it is to be done only 
by a saint. I am no saint." Velan uttered many sounds of pro- 
test. Raju felt really sorry to be shattering his faith; but it was 
the only way in which he could hope to escape the ordeal. It 
was a cool night. Raju asked Velan to go up with him to the 
river step. He took his seat on it, and Velan sat on a step below. 
Raju moved down to his side. "You have to listen to me, and 
so don't go so far away, Velan. I must speak into your ears. 
You must pay attention to what I am going to say. I am not 
a saint, Velan, I'm just an ordinary human being like anyone 
else. Listen to my story. You will know it yourself." The river 
trickling away in minute driblets made no noise. The dry 
leaves of the peepul tree rustled. Somewhere a jackal howled. 
And Raju's voice filled the night. Velan listened to him without 
uttering a word of surprise or interjection, in all humility. 
Only he looked a little more serious than usual, and there were 
lines of care on his face. 



98 



Chapter Seven 



4«$K$X$X$H$^$H$XgX$Xj><gX$^X$K$XSx$K^^ 



I WAS accepted by Marco as a member of the family. From 
guiding tourists I seemed to have come to a sort of concen- 
trated guiding of a single family. Marco was just impractical, 
an absolutely helpless man. All that he could do was to copy 
ancient things and write about them. His mind was completely 
in it. All practical affairs of life seemed impossible to him; 
such a simple matter as finding food or shelter or buying a 
railway ticket seemed to him a monumental job. Perhaps he 
married out of a desire to have someone care for his practical 
life, but unfortunately his choice was wrong — this girl herself 
was a dreamer if ever there was one. She would have greatly 
benefited by a husband who could care for her career; it was 
here that a handy man like me proved invaluable. I nearly 
gave up all my routine jobs in order to be of service to them. 
He stayed for over a month at Peak House and I was in 
entire charge of all his affairs. He never stinted any expense as 
long as a voucher was available. They still kept their room 
in the hotel. Gaffur's car was permanently engaged, almost as 
if Marco owned it. The car did at least one trip a day between 
the Peak House and the town. Joseph looked after Marco so 
well that it was unnecessary for anyone else to bother about 
him. It was understood that I should devote a lot of time to 
looking after him and his wife, without sacrificing any other 
job I might have. He paid me my daily rate and also let me 
look after my "routine jobs," My so-called routine jobs now 

99 



sounded big, but actually reduced themselves to keeping Rosie 
company and amusing her. Once in two days she went up to 
see her husband. She was showing extra solicitude for him 
nowadays. She fussed a great deal over him. It was all the same 
to himi. His table was littered with notes and dates, and he said, 
"Rosie, don't go near it. I don't want you to mess it up. It is 
just coming to a little order." I never cared to know what 
exactly he was doing. It was not my business. Nor did his wife 
seem to care for the task he was undertaking. She asked, "How 
is your food?" She was trying a new technique on him, after 
the inauguration of our own intimacy. She arranged his room. 
She spoke to Joseph about his food. Sometimes she said, "I'll 
stay on here and keep you company." And Marco acknowl- 
edged it in an absent-minded, casual manner. "All right. If you 
like. Well, Raju, are you staying on or going back?" 

I resisted my impulse to stay on, because I knew I was having 
her company fully downhill. It would be polite to leave her 
alone with him. So I said, without looking at him, "I must go 
back. I have some others coming in today. You don't mind, I 
hope." 

"Not at all. You are a man of business. I should not monop- 
olize you so much." 

"What time will you need the car tomorrow?" 

He looked at his wife and she just said, "Tomorrow, as early 
as you can." He generally said, "Bring me a few sheets of 
carbon, will you?" 

As the car sped downhill, Gaffur kept throwing glances at 
me through the looking-glass. I was cultivating a lot of reserve 
with him nowadays. I didn't like him to gossip too much about 
anything. I was afraid of gossip. I was still sensitive to such 
things and I was nervous at being alone with Gaffur and felt 
relieved as long as his remarks were confined to automobiles; 
but it was not in his nature to stick to this subject. He would 
begin with automobiles but soon get mixed up. "You must give 
me an hour for brake adjustments tomorrow. After all, me- 

lOO 



I 



chanical brakes, you know; I still maintain they are better than 
hydraulic. Just as an old, uneducated wife is better than the 
new type of girl. Oh, modern girls are very bold. I wouldn't 
let my wife live in a hotel room all by herself if I had to remain 
on duty on a hilltop!" 

It made me uncomfortable and I turned the topic deftly. 
"Do you think car designers have less experience than you?" 

"Oh, you think these engineers know more? A man like me 
who has to kick and prod a car to keep it on the road has, you 
may be sure ..." I was safe; I had turned his mind from 
Rosie. I sat in suspense. I was in an abnormal state of mind. 
Even this did not escape Gaff ur's attention. He mumbled often 
as he was driving me downhill, "You are becoming rather 
stuck-up nowadays, Raju. You are not the old friend you used 
to be." It was a fact. I was losing a great deal of my mental 
relaxation. I was obsessed with thoughts of Rosie. I reveled in 
memories of the hours I had spent with her last or in anticipa- 
tion of what I'd be doing next. I had several problems to con- 
tend with. Her husband was the least of them. He was a good 
man, completely preoccupied, probably a man with an ab- 
normal capacity for trust. But I was becoming nervous and sen- 
sitive and full of anxieties in various ways. Suppose, suppose 
— suppose? What? I myself could not specify. I was becoming 
fear-ridden. I couldn't even sort out my worries properly. I 
was in a jumble. I was suddenly seized with fears, sometimes 
with a feeling that I didn't look well enough for my sweet- 
heart. I was obsessed with the thought that I hadn't perhaps 
shaved my chin smoothly enough, and that she would run her 
fingers over my upper lip and throw me out. Sometimes I felt 
I was in rags. The silk jibba and the lace-edged dhoti were 
being overdone or were old-fashioned. She was about to shut 
the door on me because I was not modem enough for her. This 
made me run to the tailor to have him make a few dashing 
bush shirts and corduroys, and invest in hair- and face-lotions 
and perfumes of all kinds. My expenses were mounting. The 

lOI 



shop was my main source of income, together with what 
Marco gave me as my daily wage. I knew that I ought to look 
into the accounts of the shop a little more closely. I was leav- 
ing it too much to the boy to manage. My mother often told 
me, whenever she was able to get at me, "You will have to 
keep an eye on that boy. I see a lot of hangers-on there. Have 
you any idea what cash he is collecting and what is happening 
generally?" 

I usually told her, "I should certainly know how to manage 
these things. Don't think I'm so careless." And she left me 
alone. And then I went over to the shop, assumed a tone of 
great aggressiveness, and checked the accounts. The boy pro- 
duced some accounts, some cash, a statement of stock, some- 
thing else that he need for running the show, and some of his 
problems. I was in no mood to listen to his problems. I was 
busy and preoccupied, so I told him not to bother me with 
petty details and gave an impression (just an impression and 
nothing more) of being a devil for accounts. 

He always said, "Two passengers came asking for you, sir." 

Oh, bores, who wanted them, anyway? "What did they 
want?" I asked with semi-interest. 

"Three days' sightseeing, sir. They went away disappointed." 

They were always there. My reputation had survived my 
interest in the job. Railway Raju was an established name, and 
still pilgrims and travelers sought his help. The boy persisted. 
"They wanted to know where you were." This gave me food 
for thought. I didn't want this fool of a fellow to send them 
up to my Room 28 at the hotel. Fortunately, he did not know. 
Otherwise he might have done so. "What shall I tell them, 
Raju-sir?" He always called me "Raju-sir." It was his idea of 
combining deference with familiarity. 

I merely replied, "Tell them I'm busy; that is all. I have no 
time. I'm very busy." 

"May I act as their guide, sir?" he asked eagerly. This fellow 
was acting as a successor in my jobs one by one. Next, prob- 
102 



I 



ably, he would ask permission to keep the girl company! I 
felt annoyed with his question and asked him, "Who will look 
after the shop?" 

"I have a cousin. He can watch the shop for an hour or two, 
while I am away." 

I could not think of a reply. I could not decide. The whole 
thing was too bothersome. My old life, in which I was not 
in the least interested, was dogging my steps; my mother fac- 
ing me with numerous problems: municipal tax, the kitchen 
tiles needing attention, the shop, accounts, letters from the vil- 
lage, my health, and so on and so forth; to me she was a figure 
out of a dream, mumbling vague sounds; and this boy had his 
own way of cornering and attacking me. Then Gaffur with 
his sly remarks and looks, ever on the brink of gossip — Oh, 
I was tired of it all. I was in no mood for anything. My mind 
was on other matters. Even my finances were unreal to me, 
although if I cared to look at my savings book I could know 
at a glance how the level of the reservoir was going down. But 
I did not want to examine it too closely as long as the man 
at the counter was able to give me the cash I wanted. Thanks 
to my father's parsimonious habits, I had a bank account. The 
only reality in my life and consciousness was Rosie. All my 
mental powers were now turned to keep her within my reach, 
and keep her smiling all the time, neither of which was at all 
easy. I would willingly have kept at her side all the time, as a 
sort of parasite; but in that hotel it was not easy. I was always 
racked with the thought that the man at the desk and the boys 
at the hotel were keeping an eye on me and were commenting 
behind my back. 

I did not want to be observed going to Room' 28. I was 
becoming self-conscious about it. I very much wished that the 
architecture of the place could be altered so that I might go up 
without having the desk-man watch me. I was sure he was 
noting down the hour of my arrival with Rosie, and of my 
departure. His morbid, inquisitive mind, I was sure, must have 

103 



been working on all the details of my life behind the closed 
doors of Room 28. 1 didn't like the way he looked at me when- 
ever I passed: I didn't like the curve of his lip — I knew he was 
smiling at an inward joke at my expense. I wished I could 
ignore him, but he was an early associate of mine, and I owed 
him a general remark or two. While passing him, I tried to 
look casual, and stopped to say, "Did you see that Nehru is 
going to London?" or "The new taxes will kill all initiative," 
and he agreed with me and explained something, and that was 
enough. Or we discussed the Government of India's tourist 
plans or hotel arrangements, and I had to let him talk — the 
poor fellow never suspected how little I cared for tourism or 
taxes or anything now. I sometimes toyed with the thought of 
changing the hotel. But it was not easy. Both Rosie and her 
husband seemed to be deeply devoted to this hotel. He was 
somehow averse to changing, although he never came down 
from his heights, and the girl seemed to have got used to this 
room with its view of a coconut grove outside, and people 
irrigating it from a well. It was a fascination that I could not 
easily understand or explain. 

In other ways too I found it difficult to understand the girl. 
I found as I went on that she was gradually losing the free 
and easy manner of her former days. She allowed me to make 
love to her, of course, but she was also beginning to show 
excessive consideration for her husband on the hill. In the 
midst of my caresses, she would suddenly free herself and say, 
"Tell Gaffur to bring the car. I want to go and see him." 

I had not yet reached the stage of losing my temper or 
speaking sharply to her. So I calmly answered, "Gaffur will 
not come till this time tomorrow. You were up only yester- 
day. Why do you want to go again? He expects you there 
only tomorrow." 

"Yes," she would say and remain thoughtful. I didn't like to 
see her sit up like that on her bed and brood, her hair unat- 
104 



L 



tended, her dress all crinkled. She clasped her knees with her 
hands. 

"What is troubling you?" I had to ask her. "Won't you tell 
me? I will always help you." 

She would shake her head and say, "After all, he is my 
husband. I have to respect him. I cannot leave him there." 

My knowledge of women being poor and restricted to one, 
I could not decide how to view her statements. I could not 
understand whether she was pretending, whether her present 
pose was pretense or whether her account of all her husband's 
shortcomings was false, just to entice me. It was complex and 
obscure. I had to tell her, "Rosie, you know very well that 
even if Gaffur came, he couldn't drive uphill at this hour." 

"Yes, yes, I understand," she would reply and lapse into a 
mysterious silence again. 

"What is troubling you?" 

She started crying. "After all . . . After all . . . Is this right 
what I am doing? After all, he has been so good to me, given 
me comfort and freedom. What husband in the world would 
let his wife go and live in a hotel room by herself, a hundred 
miles away?" 

"It is not a hundred miles, but fifty-eight only," I corrected. 
"Shall I order you coffee or anything to eat?" 

"No," she would say point-blank, but continue the train of 
her own thoughts. "As a good man he may not mind, but is it 
not a wife's duty to guard and help her husband, whatever 
the way in which he deals with her?" This last phrase was to 
offset in advance any reminder I might make about his indif- 
ference to her. 

It was a confusing situation. Naturally, I could take no part 
in this subject: there was nothing I could add to or subtract 
from what she was saying. Distance seemed to lend enchant- 
ment to her view now. But I knew that she would have to 
spend only a few hours with him to come downhill raging 

105 



against him, saying the worst possible things. Sometimes I 
heartily wished that the man would descend from his heights, 
take her, and clear out of the place. That would at least end 
this whole uncertain business once for all and help me to return 
to my platform duties. I could possibly try to do that even 
now. What prevented me from leaving the girl alone? The 
longer Marco went on with his work, the longer this agony 
was stretched. But he seemed to flourish in his solitude; that's 
probably what he had looked for all his life. But why could 
he not do something about his wife? A blind fellow. Some- 
times I felt angry at the thought of him. He had placed me in 
a hopeless predicament. I was compelled to ask her, "Why 
don't you stay up with him, then?" 

She merely replied, "He sits up all night writing, and — " 

"If he sits up all night writing, during the day you should 
talk to him," I would say with a look of innocence. 

"But all day he is in the cave!" 

"Well, you may go and see it too. Why not? It ought to 
interest you." 

"While he is copying, no one may talk to him." 

"Don't talk to him, but study the objects yourself. A good 
wife ought to be interested in all her husband's activities." 

"True," she said, and merely sighed. This was a thoroughly 
inexperienced and wrong line for me to take; it led us no- 
where, but only made her morose. 

Her eyes lit up with a new hope when I spoke about the dance. 
It was after all her art that I first admired; of late, in our 
effort to live the lovers' life, that all-important question was 
pushed to the background. Her joy at finding shops, cinemas, 
and caresses made her forget for a while her primary obsession. 
But not for long. She asked me one evening, point-blank, "Are 
you also like him?" 

"In what way?" 

"Do you also hate to see me dance?" 
1 06 



**Not at all. What makes you think so?** 

"At one time you spoke like a big lover of art, but now 
you never give it a thought." 

It was true. I said something in excuse, clasped her hands in 
mine, and swore earnestly, "I will do anything for you. I will 
give my life to see you dance. Tell me what to do. I will do 
it for you." 

She brightened up. Her eyes lit up with a new fervor at the 
mention of dancing. So I sat up with her, helping her to day- 
dream. I found out the clue to her affection and utilized it to 
the utmost. Her art and her husband could not find a place in 
her thoughts at the same time; one drove the other out. 

She was full of plans. At five in the morning she'd start her 
practice and continue for three hours. She would have a sep- 
arate hall, long enough and wide enough for her to move in. 
It must have a heavy carpet, which would be neither too 
smooth under the feet nor too rough, and which would not 
fold while she practiced her steps on it. At one corner of the 
room she'd have a bronze figure of Nataraja, the god of 
dancers, the god whose primal dance created the vibrations 
that set the worlds in motion. She would have a long incense- 
holder, in which at all times she would have incense sticks 
burning. After her morning practice, she would call up the 
chauffeur, 

"Are you going to have a car?" I asked. 

"Naturally, otherwise how can I move about? When I have 
so many engagements, it will be necessary for me to have a 
car. It'll be indispensable, don't you think?" 

"Surely. I'll remember it." 

She would then spend an hour or two in the forenoon 
studying the ancient works on the art, Natya Shastra of Bharat 
Munij a thousand years old, and various other books, because 
without a proper study of the ancient methods it would be 
impossible to keep the purity of the classical forms. All the 
books were in her uncle's house, and she would write to him 

107 



to send them on to her by and by. She would also want a 
pundit to come to her to help her to understand the texts, as 
they were all written in an old, terse style. "Can you get me a 
Sanskrit pundit} " she asked. 

"Of course I can. There are dozens of them." 

"I shall also want him to read for me episodes from Rama- 
yana and Mahabarata, because they are a treasure house, and 
we can pick up so many ideas for new compositions from 
them." 

A little rest after lunch; and at three o'clock she would go 
out and do shopping, and a drive and return home in the 
evening or see a picture, unless, of course, there was a per- 
formance in the evening. If there was a performance, she 
would like to rest till three in the afternoon and reach the hall 
only half an hour before the show. "That would be enough, 
because I shall do all the make-up and dressing before I leave 
the house." 

She thought of every detail, and dreamed of it night and 
day. Her immediate need would be a party of drummers and 
musicians to assist her morning practice. When she was ready 
to appear before the public, she would tell me and then I 
could fix her public engagements. I felt rather baffled by her 
fervor. I wished I could keep pace at least with her idiom. I 
felt that I ought immediately to pick up and cultivate the 
necessary jargon. I felt silly to be watching her and listening 
to her, absolutely tongue-tied. There were, of course, two 
ways open: to bluff one's way through and trust to luck, or to 
make a clean breast of it all. I listened to her talk for two days 
and finally confessed to her, "I am a layman, not knowing 
much of the technicalities of the dance; I'd like you to teach 
me something of it." 

I didn't want her to interpret it as an aversion on my part 
to the art. That might drive her back into the arms of her 
husband, and so I took care to maintain the emphasis on my 
passion for the art. It gave us a fresh intimacy. This common 
1 08 



interest brought us close together. Wherever we were she kept 
talking to me on the various subtleties of the art, its techni- 
calities, and explaining as to a child its idioms. She seemed to 
notice our surroundings less and less. In Gaffur's car as we sat 
she said, "You know what a pallavi is? The time scheme is all- 
important in it. It does not always run in the simple style of 
one-two, one-two; it gets various odds thrown in, and at a 
different tempo." She uttered its syllables, "Ta-ka-ta-ki-ta, 
Ta-ka." It amused me. "You know, to get the footwork right 
within those five or seven beats requires real practice, and 
when the tempo is varied . . ." This was something that Gaffur 
could safely overhear, as we went up the hill, as we came out 
of a shop, as we sat in a cinema. While seeing a picture, she 
would suddenly exclaim, "My uncle has with him a very old 
song written on a palm leaf. No one has seen it. My mother was 
the only person in the whole country who knew the song and 
could dance to it. I'll get that song too from my uncle. I'll 
show you how it goes. Shall we go back to our room? I don't 
want to see more of this picture. It looks silly." 

We immediately adjourned to Room 28, where she asked me 
to remain seated, and went into the anteroom and came back 
with her dress tucked in and tightened up for the performance. 
She said, "I'll show you how it goes. Of course, I'm not doing 
it under the best of conditions. I need at least a drummer. . . . 
Move off that chair, and sit on the bed. I want some space 
here.'* 

She stood at one end of the hall and sang the song lightly, 
in a soft undertone, a song from an ancient Sanskrit composi- 
tion of a lover and lass on the banks of Jamuna; and it began 
with such a verve, when she lightly raised her foot and let it 
down, allowing her anklets to jingle, I felt thrilled. Though I 
was an ignoramus, I felt moved by the movements, rhythm, 
and time, although I did not quite follow the meaning of the 
words. She stopped now and then to explain: ^'Nari means girl 
— and mani is a jewel. . . . The whole line means: *It is im- 

109 



possible for me to bear this burden of love you have cast on 
me.' " She panted while she explained. There were beads of 
perspiration on her forehead and lip. She danced a few steps, 
paused for a moment, and explained, "Lover means always 
God," and she took the trouble to explain further to me the 
intricacies of its rhythm. The floor resounded with the stamp- 
ing of her feet. I felt nervous that those on the floor below 
might ask us to stop, but she never cared, never bothered about 
anything. I could see, through her eflFort, the magnificence of 
the composition, its symbolism, the boyhood of a very young 
god, and his fulfillment in marriage, the passage of years from 
youth to decay, but the heart remaining ever fresh like a lotus 
on a pond. When she indicated the lotus with her fingers, you 
could almost hear the ripple of water around it. She held the 
performance for nearly an hour; it filled me with the greatest 
pleasure on earth. I could honestly declare that, while I watched 
her perform, my mind was free, for once, from all carnal 
thoughts; I viewed her as a pure abstraction. She could make 
me forget my surroundings. I sat with open-mouthed wonder 
watching her. Suddenly she stopped and flung her whole 
weight on me with "What a darling. You are giving me a new 
lease on life." 



Next time we went up the hill our strategy was ready. I would 
drop her there and come back to town. She would stay behind 
for two days, bearing all the possible loneliness and irritation, 
and speak to her husband. It was imperative that before we 
proceeded any further we should clear up the entire matter 
with her husband. She would do the talking for two days. And 
then I would go up and meet them, and then we would plan 
further stages of work for her career. She had suddenly be- 
come very optimistic about her husband, and often leaned over 
to whisper, "I think he will agree to our proposal," so that 
GaflFur should not know, or reveled in further wishful thoughts. 



no 



b 



"He is not bad. It's all a show, you know. He is merely posing 
to be uninterested. You don't talk to him at all. FU do all the 
talking. I know how to tackle him. Leave him to me." And so 
she spoke until we reached the top. "Oh, see those birds! What 
colors! You know, there is a small piece about a parrot on a 
maiden's arm. I'll dance it for you sometime." 

He was in an unbelievably cheerful mood. He greeted his 
wife with greater warmth than ever before. "Do you know 
there is a third cave; a sort of vault leads into it. I scraped the 
lime, and there you have a complete fresco of musical nota- 
tions, in symbolic figures. The style is of the fifth century. I 
am puzzled how such a wide period-difference has come 
about," he said, greeting us on the veranda itself. He had 
pulled up a chair and was watching the valley, with papers 
on his lap. He held up his latest discovery. His wife looked 
at it with due ecstasy and cried, "Musical notations! What 
wonderful things! Do take me to see them, will you?" 

"Yes; come with me tomorrow morning. I'll explain it to 
you." 

"Oh, wonderful!" And she cried, in a highly affected voice, 
"I'll try and sing them to you." 

"I doubt if you can. It's more difficult than you imagine." 

She looked fevered and anxious about pleasing him. It seemed 
to bode no good. This all-round cheeriness somehow did not 
please me. He turned and asked, "What about you, Raju? 
Would you like to see my discovery?" 

"Of course, but I have to get back to town as soon as pos- 
sible. I just came to leave the lady here, because she was so 
anxious; and to know if you want anything and if things are 
quite satisfactory." 

"Oh, perfect, perfect!" he cried. "That Joseph is a wonderful 
man. I don't see him, I don't hear him, but he does everything 
for me at the right time. That's how I want things to be, you 
know. He moves on ball-bearings, I think." 

Ill 



That's what I thought when I saw Rosie demonstrate to me 
in her hotel room, her whole movement being so much against 
the fixed factors of bone and muscle, walls and floor. 

Marco continued his rhapsody on Joseph. "I can never thank 
you enough for finding me a place like this and a man like 
Joseph. He's really a wonder. What a pity he should be wasting 
his talent on this hilltop!" 

"You are very appreciative," I said. "I'm sure he'll be elated 
to know your opinion." 

"Oh, I have told him that without any reserve. I have also 
invited him to join my household any time he wishes to come 
and settle in the plains." 

He was unusually loquacious and warm. His nature flour- 
ished on solitude, and cave frescoes. How happy he'd have 
been, I thought, to have had Joseph for a wife! My mind was 
busy with these thoughts as he was talking. Rosie went on like 
a good wife, saying, "I hope there is food to eat, and every- 
thing is okay. If there is milk may I give you all coffee?" She 
ran in and returned to say, "Yes, there is milk. I'll make coffee 
for all of you. I won't take more than five minutes." 

I was somehow feeling not quite at ease today. There was a 
lot of suspense and anxiety at the back of my mind. I was 
nervous of what he would say to Rosie and really anxious that 
he should not hurt her. Also, at the same time, a fear that if he 
became too nice to her, she might not care for me. I wanted 
him to be good to her, listen to her proposals, and yet leave 
her to my care! What an impossible, fantastic combination of 
circumstances to expect! 

While Rosie was fussing with the coffee inside, he brought 
out another chair for me. "I always do my work here," he said. 
I felt that he honored the valley with his patronage. He took 
out a bundle of sheets in an album, and a few photographs. He 
had made voluminous notes on all the cave paintings. He had 
filled sheet after sheet with their description, transcription, and 
what not. They were obscure, but still I went through them 

112 



with a show of interest. I wished I could ask questions on their 
value, but again I found myself tongue-tied, because I lacked 
the idiom. I wished I had been schooled in a jargon-picking 
institution; that would have enabled me to move with various 
persons on equal terms. No one would listen to my plea of 
ignorance and take the trouble to teach me as Rosie did. I lis- 
tened to him. He was flinging at me dates, evidence, generaHza- 
tions, and descriptions of a variety of paintings and carvings. I 
dared not ask what was the earthly use of all that he was doing. 
When coffee arrived, brought on a tray by Rosie (she had 
glided in softly, as if to show that she could rival Joseph's steps; 
I was startled when she held the cups under my nose), he said 
to me, "When this is published, it'll change all our present ideas 
of the history of civilization. I shall surely mention in the book 
my debt to you in discovering this place." 

Two days later I was back there. I went there at noon, at a 
time when I was sure that Marco would have gone down to 
the cave so that I might possibly get Rosie alone for a few 
moments. They were not in the bungalow. Joseph was there, 
arranging their midday meal in the back room. He said, "They 
have gone down and are not back yet." 

I looked up at Joseph's face as if to get a sign of how things 
were. But he seemed evasive. I asked cheerily, "How is every- 
thing, Joseph?" 

"Very well, sir.** 

"That man thinks so well of you!" I said to flatter him. 

But he took it indifferently. "What if he does! I only do my 
duty. In my profession, some may curse, and some may bless, 
but I don't care who says what. Last month there was a group 
who wanted to assault me because I said I could not procure 
girls for them, but was I afraid? I ordered them to quit next 
morning. This is a spot for people to live in. I give them all the 
comforts ungrudgingly. It costs eight annas sometimes to get a 
pot of water, and I have to send cans and pots with any bus or 

"3 



truck going downhill, and wait for its return — ^but the guests 
will never know the difficulty. They are not expected to. It's 
my business to provide, and it's their business to pay the bill. 
Let there be no confusion about it. I do my duty and others 
must do theirs. But if they think Tm a procurer, I get very 
angry." 

"Naturally, no one would like it," I said just to cut his 
monologue. "I hope this man does not bother you in any way?" 

"Oh, no, he is a gem. A good man; would be even better 
if his wife left him alone. He was so happy without her. Why 
did you bring her back? She seems to be a horrible nagger." 

"Very well, I'll take her downhill and leave the man in 
peace," I said, starting for the cave. The pathway on the grass 
had become smooth and white with Marco's tread. I passed 
through the thicket and was crossing the sandy stretch when 
I found him coming in the opposite direction. He was dressed 
heavily as usual, the portfolio swung in his grip. A few yards 
behind him followed Rosie. I could not read anything from 
their faces. 

"Hello!" I cried cheerily, facing him. He looked up, paused, 
opened his mouth to say something, swallowed his words, 
stepped aside to avoid encountering me, and resumed his for- 
ward march. Rosie followed as if she were walking in her 
sleep. She never even turned to give me a look. A few yards 
behind Rosie I brought up the rear, and we entered the bunga- 
low gate as a sort of caravan. I felt it would be best to follow 
their example of silence, and to look just as moody and morose 
as they. It matched the company very well. 

From the top of the veranda he turned to address us. He 
said, "It'll not be necessary for either of you to come in." He 
went straight into his room and shut the door. 

Joseph emerged from the kitchen door, wiping a plate. "I'm 
waiting to take instructions for dinner." 

Rosie without a word passed up the steps, moved down the 
veranda, opened the door of his room, passed in, and shut the 
114 



door. This utter quietness was getting on my nerves. It was 
entirely unexpected and I did not know how to respond to it. 
I thought he would either fight us or argue or do something. 
But this behavior completely baffled me. 

Gaffur came round, biting a straw between his teeth, to ask, 
"What time are we going down?" 

I knew this was not his real intention in coming, but to see 
the drama. He must have whiled away his time gossiping with 
Joseph; and they must have pooled their information about the 
girl. I said, "Why are you in a hurry, GafFur?" and added with 
bitterness, "When you can stay on and see a nice show." 

He came close to me and said, "Raju, this is not at all good. 
Let us get away. Leave them alone. After all, they are husband 
and wife; they'll know how to make it up. Come on. Go back 
to your normal work. You were so interested and carefree and 
happy then." 

I had nothing to say to this. It was very reasonable advice he 
was giving me. Even at that moment, it would have been all 
different if God had given me the sense to follow Gaffur's 
advice. I should have gone quietly back, leaving Rosie to solve 
her problems with her husband. That would have saved many 
sharp turns and twists in my life's course. I told Gaffur, "Wait 
near the car, I'll tell you," keeping irritation out of my voice. 

Gaffur went away, grumbling. Presently I heard him sound- 
ing the horn — as irate bus-drivers do when their passengers 
get down at a wayside teashop. I decided to ignore it. I saw 
the door on the other side open. Marco showed himself out- 
side the front veranda, and said, "Driver, are you ready to go?" 

"Yes, sir," said Gaffur. 

"Very well then," said the man. He picked up his bundle 
and started w? Iking to the car. I saw him through the glass 
shutters of the hall window. It puzzled me. I tried to cross the 
hall and go out through the door, but it was bolted. I quickly 
turned, ran down the steps, and went round to Gaffur's car. 
Marco had already taken his seat. Gaffur had not started the 

"5 



engine yet. He was afraid to ask about the others, but marked 
time by fumbling with the switch-key. He must have been 
surprised at the effect of sounding the horn. God knows why 
he did it; perhaps he was testing it or idling or wanted to re- 
mind ever^^one concerned that time was passing. 

"Where are you going?" I asked Marco, taking courage and 
putting my head into the car. 

"I'm going down to the hotel to close my account there." 

"What do you mean?" I asked. 

He looked me up and down with a fierce glance. "I do not 
have to explain. I took the room and I am closing the account; 
that is all. Driver, you may present me your bill direct. 
Have a receipt ready when you want payment." 

"Is no one else coming?" ventured Gaffur, looking in the 
direction of the bungalow. 

The man merely said, "No," and added, "If anyone else is 
coming, I'll get out." 

"Driver," I said with a sudden tone of authority. Gaffur was 
startled at being called "driver" by me. "Take that man wher- 
ever he may want to go and bring me back the car tomorrow 
— and you will make complete settlement of all your bills with 
him. Keep a separate account for my own trips." I could have 
made a further demonstration of arrogance by saying I had 
brought the car for my own business and so forth, but I saw no 
point in all that. As I stood watching Marco, a sudden impulse 
moved me even without my knowledge. I opened the door of 
the car and pulled him out of it. 

For all the heavy helmet and glasses that he wore, he was 
frail — too much frieze-gazing and cave-visiting had emaciated 
him. "What? Are you attempting to manhandle me?" he 
shouted. 

"I want to talk to you. I want you to talk. You can't just 
go away like this." I found his breath coming and going 
sharply. I calmed down and said, softening my style, "Come 
in and have your food and speak out. Let us talk, discuss 
ii6 



things, and then do what you like. You can't abandon a wife 
in this place and go away." I looked at Gaffur and said, "You 
are not in a hurry, are you?" 

"No, no. Have your food and come, sir. Plenty of time 
still." 

"I'll ask Joseph to give you food," I added. I felt sorry that I 
had not taken charge of the situation earlier. 

"Who are you?" Marco asked suddenly. "What is your busi- 
ness with me?" 

"A great deal. I have helped you. I have given a lot of time 
to your business. I undertook a lot of responsibility for you, 
these several weeks." 

"And I dispense with your service from this minute," he 
cried. "Give me your bill and be done with it." Even in his 
most excited, emotional state, he would not forget his vouchers. 

I said, "Had we better not go into it calmly, sitting down 
and calculating? I have with me some money that you left with 
me before." 

"Very well." He grunted. "Let us be done with everything, 
and then you get out of my sight." 

"Easily done," I said. "But look here, this bungalow has two 
suites of rooms, and I can engage one perfectly legitimately." 

Joseph appeared on the steps. "Will you be wanting a din- 
ner tonight?" 

"No," he said. 

"Yes; I may," I said. "You may leave, Joseph, if you are in a 
hurry. If I am staying, I'll send for you. Open the other suite 
and account it to me." 

"Yes, sir." He unlocked another door and I strode into it 
with the air of a proprietor. I left the door open. It was my 
room and I was free to leave the door ajar if I chose. 

I looked out of the window. The sun's rays from the west 
were touching the tops of trees with gold. It was a breath- 
taking sight. I wished Rosie could see it. She was inside. I had 
lost the privilege of walking into their room. I sat down in the 

"7 



wooden chair in my suite and wondered what to do. What was 
it that I had done now? I had no clear program. I had no 
doubt successfully pulled him out of the car. But that took us 
nowhere. He had gone and bolted himself in his room, and I 
was in mine. If I had let him go, I might at least have had a 
chance to bring Rosie round and get her to talk about herself. 
Now I had made a mess. Could I go out and ask Gaffur to 
sound the horn again so that the man might emerge from his 
room? 

Half an hour passed thus. There was absolutely no sign of 
any speech or movement. I tiptoed out of my room. I went to 
the kitchen. Joseph was gone. I lifted the lids of the vessels. 
Food was there. No one seemed to have touched it. Heaven 
knew they were both starving. I felt a sudden pity for the man. 
Rosie must have completely faded out. It was her habit to ask 
for something to eat every two hours. At the hotel I constantly 
ordered a tray for her; if we were out I would stop all along 
the way to buy fruit or refreshment. Now the poor girl must 
be exhausted — and add to it the walk up and down to the cave. 
I felt suddenly angry at the thought of her. Why couldn't she 
eat or tell me what was what instead of behaving like a deaf- 
mute? Had the monster cut off her tongue? I wondered in 
genuine horror. I put the food on plates, put them on a tray, 
walked to their door. I hesitated for a second — only for a sec- 
ond; if I hesitated longer, I knew I would never go in. I pushed 
the door with my feet. Rosie was lying on her bed with eyes 
shut. (Was she in a faint? I wondered for a second.) I had never 
seen her in such a miserable condition before. He was sitting 
in his chair, elbow on the table, his chin on his fist. I had never 
seen him so vacant before. I felt pity for him. I held myself 
responsible for it. Why couldn't I have kept out of all this? I 
placed the tray before him. 

"People have evidently forgotten their food today. If you 
have a burden on your mind, it*s no reason why you should 
waste your food." 
ii8 



I 



Rosie opened her eyes. They were swollen. She had large, 
vivacious eyes, but they looked as if they had grown one round 
larger now, and were bulging and fearsome, dull and red. She 
was a sorry sight in every way. She sat up and told me, "Don't 
waste any more of your time with us. You go back. That's all 
I have to say," in a thick, gruff, crackling voice. Her voice 
shook a little as she spoke. "I mean it. Leave us now." 

What had come over this woman? Was she in league with 
her husband? She had every authority to ask me to get out. 
Probably she repented her folly in encouraging me all along. 
All I could say in reply was, "First, you must have your food. 
For what reason are you fasting?" 

She merely repeated, "I want you to go." 

"Aren't you coming down?" I persisted to Marco. The man 
behaved as if he were a deaf-mute. He never showed any sign 
of hearing us. 

She merely repeated, "I am asking you to leave us. Do you 
hear?" 

I grew weak and cowardly at her tone. I muttered, "I mean, 
you are — or he may want to go down, if it is so — " 

She clicked her tongue in disgust. "Do you not understand? 
We want you to leave." 

I grew angry. This woman who had been in my arms forty- 
eight hours ago was showing off. Many insulting and incrimi- 
nating remarks welled up in my throat. But even in that stress 
I had the sense to swallow back my words, and, feeling that it 
would be dangerous to let myself stand there any longer, 
turned on my heel and went in a stride to the car. "Gaffur, 
let us go." 

"Only one passenger?" 

"Yes." I banged the door and took my seat. 

"What about them?" 

"I don't know. You had better settle with them later." 

"If I have to come again to talk to them, who pays the fare 
for the trip?" 

119 



I beat my brow. "Begone, man. You can settle all that later." 
Gaffur sat in his seat with the look of a philosopher, started 
the car, and was off. I had a hope, as I turned to look, that she 
might watch me from the window. But no such luck. The car 
sped downward. Gaffur said, *'It's time your elders found a 
bride for you." I said nothing in reply, and he said, through 
the gathering darkness, "Raju, I'm senior in years. I think this 
is the best thing you have done. You will be more happy here- 
after." 

Gaffur's prophecy was not fulfilled in the coming days. I cannot 
remember a more miserable period of my life. The usual symp- 
toms were present, of course: no taste for food, no sound sleep, 
no stability (I couldn't stay put in any one place), no peace 
of mind, no sweetness of temper or speech — no, no, no, a num- 
ber of nos. With all seriousness I returned to my normal avoca- 
tion. But everything looked so unreal. I relieved the boy at the 
shop, sat there and handed out things and received cash, but 
always with a feeling that it was a silly occupation. I walked 
up and down the platform when the train arrived. Sure as any- 
thing, I could always get someone to take round. 

"Are you Railway Raju?" 

"Yes," and then the fat paterfamilias, wife, and two children. 

"You see, we are coming from . . . and So-and-so men- 
tioned your name to us as a man who would surely help us. 
. . . You see, my wife is keen on a holy bath at the source of 
Sarayu, and then I'd like to see an elephant camp, and anything 
else you suggest will be most welcome. But remember, only 
three days. I couldn't get even an hour of extra leave; I'll have 
to be in my office on . . ." 

I hardly paid attention to what they said. I knew all their 
hnes in advance; all that I paid attention to was the time at 
their disposal, and the extent of their financial outlay. Even the 
latter did not really interest me. It was more mechanical than 
intentional. I called up Gaffur, sat in the front seat, took the 
1 20 



party about. While passing the New Extension, I pointed with- 
out even turning my head, "Sir Frederick Lawley . . ." When 
we passed the statue, I knew exactly when the question would 
come, "Whose is this statue?" and I knew when the next ques- 
tion was coming and had my answer ready, "The man left be- 
hind by Robert Clive to administer the district. He built all the 
tanks and dams and developed this district. Good man. Hence 
the statue." At the tenth-century Iswara temple at Vinayak 
Street, I reeled off the description of the frieze along the wall: 
"If you look closely, you will see the entire epic Ramayana 
carved along the wall," and so forth. I took them to the source 
of Sarayu on the misty heights of Mempi Peak, watched the 
lady first plunge in the basin, the man avowing that he did not 
care and then following her example. I then took them into the 
inner shrine, showed them the ancient stone image on the pillar, 
with Shiva absorbing the Ganges river in his matted locks. . . . 

I collected my fee, and my commission from Gaffur and the 
rest, and saw them off next day. I did it all mechanically, with- 
out zest. I was, of course, thinking of Rosie all the time. "That 
man has probably starved her to death, driven her mad, or left 
her in the open to be eaten by tigers," I told myself. I looked 
forlorn and uninterested and my mother tried to find out why. 
She asked, "What has gone wrong with you?" 

"Nothing," I replied. My mother had been so little used to 
seeing me about the house that she felt surprised and uneasy. 
But she left me alone. I ate, slept, hung about the railway plat- 
form, conducted visitors about, but I was never at peace with 
myself. My mind was all the while troubled. It was a natural 
obsession. I didn't even know what had happened, what all the 
silence and unnatural calm meant. This was a most unexpected 
development. As I had visualized, I had thought in my dreamy- 
happy way that he'd present me with his wife and say, "I'm 
happy you are going to look after her and her art; I'd like to be 
left alone to pursue my cave studies; you are such a fine fellow 
to do this for us." Or, on the other hand, he might have rolled 

121 



up his sleeve to throw me out — one or the other, but I never 
bargained for tiiis kind of inexplicable stalemate. And what 
was more, for the girl to support him with such ferocity. I 
was appalled at the duplicity of her heart. I agonized over and 
over again, piecing together the data and reading their meaning. 
I dehberately refrained from opening the subject with Gaffur. 
He respected my sentiment and never mentioned it again, al- 
though I was hoping desperately each day that he would say 
something about them. On certain days when I wanted him, he 
was not available. I knew then that he must have gone to the 
Peak House. I refrained from going near the Anand Bhavan. If 
any of my customers wanted a hotel I sent them nowadays to 
the Taj. I did not have to bother myself about them unduly. 
Marco had said he'd settle their accounts direct — well, you 
could depend upon him to do it. I came into the picture only 
to collect a commission from them, as from Gaffur himself. 
But I was prepared to forgo it all. I was in no mood to make 
money. In the world of gloom in which I was plunged there 
was no place for money. There must have been some money, I 
suppose, somewhere. My mother was able to carry on the 
household as before, and the shop continued to exist. I knew 
Gaffur's account must also have been settled. But he never 
said a word about it. So much the better. I didn't want to be 
reminded of the life that was gone. 

I felt bored and terrified by the boredom of normal life, so 
much had I got used to a glamorous, romantic existence. Grad- 
ually I found taking tourists around a big nuisance. I began to 
avoid the railway station. I let the porter's son meet the 
tourists. He had already attempted his hand at it before. Of 
course, the tourists might miss my own speeches and descrip- 
tions, but lately I had become dull-witted, and they probably 
preferred the boy, as he was at least as curious and interested 
as they in seeing places. Perhaps he was beginning to answer to 
the name of Railway Raju too. 

How many days passed thus? Only thirty, though they 

122 



looked to me like years. I was lying asleep on the floor of my 
house one afternoon. I was half awake and had noted the de- 
parture of the Madras Mail at four-thirty. When the chug- 
chug of the train died away, I tried to sleep again, having been 
disturbed by its noisy arrival. My mother came and said, 
"Someone is asking for you." She didn't wait for questions, 
but went into the kitchen. 

I got up and went to the door. There stood Rosie on 
the threshold, with a trunk at her feet and a bag under 
her arm. "Rosie, why didn't you say you were coming? 
Come in, come in. Why stand there? That was only my 
mother." I carried her trunk in. I could guess a great many 
things about her. I didn't want to ask her any questions. I 
didn't feel like knowing anything. I fussed about her, lost my 
head completely. "Mother!" I cried. "Here is Rosie! She is 
going to be a guest in our house." 

My mother came out of the kitchen formally, smiled a wel- 
come, and said, "Be seated on that mat. What's your name?'* 
she asked kindly, and was rather taken aback to hear the name 
"Rosie." She expected a more orthodox name. She looked 
anguished for a moment, wondering how she was going to 
accommodate a "Rosie" in her home. 

I stood about awkwardly. I had not shaved since the morn- 
ing; I had not combed my hair; my dhoti was discolored and 
rumpled; the vest I wore had several holes on the back and 
chest. I folded my arms across my chest to cover the holes. I 
could not have made a worse impression if I had tried hard. I 
was ashamed of the torn mat — it had been there since we built 
the house — the dark hall with the smoky walls and tiles. All 
the trouble I used to take to create an impression on her was 
gone in a moment. If she realized that this was my normal set- 
ing, God knew how she would react. I was glad at least I was 
wearing my torn vest instead of being bare-bodied as was my 
habit at home. My mother hardly ever noticed the hairiness of 
my chest, but Rosie, oh — 

"3 



My mother was busy in the kitchen, but she managed to 
come out for a moment to observe the formality of receiving 
a guest. A guest was a guest, even though she might be a Rosie. 
So my mother came up and sat down on the mat with an air 
of settling down to a chat. The very first question she asked 
was, "Who has come with you, Rosie?" Rosie blushed, hesi- 
tated, and looked at me. I moved a couple of steps backward 
in order that she might see me only dimly, and not in all my 
raggedness. 

I replied, "I think she has come alone, Mother." 

My mother was amazed. "Girls today! How courageous you 
are! In our day we wouldn't go to the street corner without 
an escort. And I have been to the market only once in my life, 
when Raju's father was alive." 

Rosie blinked and listened in silence, not knowing how to 
react to these statements. She simply opened her eyes wide and 
raised her brows. I watched her. She looked a little paler and 
slightly careworn — not the swollen-eyed, gruff -toned monster 
she had seemed the other day. Her tone was sweet as ever. She 
looked slightly weak, but as if she hadn't a care in the world. 
My mother said, "Water is boiling; I'll give you coffee. Do you 
like coffee?" I was relieved that the conversation was coming 
down to this level. I hoped my mother would continue to talk 
about herself rather than ask questions. But it was not to be. 
She asked next, "Where do you come from?" 

"From Madras," I answered promptly. 

"What brings you here?" 

"She has come to see some friends." 

"Are you married?" 

"No," I answered promptly. 

My mother shot a look at me. It seemed to be meaningful. 
She withdrew her glance swiftly from me, and, looking at her 
guest kindly, asked, "Don't you understand Tamil?" 

I knew I should shut up now. I let Rosie answer in Tamil, 
"Yes. It's what we speak at home.'* 
124 



"Who else have you in your house?" 

"My uncle, my aunt, and — " She was trailing away, and my 
mother shot at her the next terrible question. "What is your 
father's name?" 

It was a dreadful question for the girl. She knew only her 
mother and always spoke of her. I had never questioned her 
about it. The girl remained silent for a moment and said, "I 
have ... no father." 

My mother was at once filled with the greatest sympathy 
and cried, "Poor one, without father or mother. I am sure your 
uncle must be looking after you well. Are you a B.A.?" 

"Yes." I corrected. "She is an M.A." 

"Good, good, brave girl. Then you lack nothing in the 
world. You are not like us uneducated women. You will get 
on anywhere. You can ask for your railway ticket, call a 
policeman if somebody worries you, and keep your money. 
What are you going to do? Are you going to join government 
service and earn? Brave girl." My mother was full of admira- 
tion for her. She got up, went in, and brought her a tumbler 
of coffee. The girl drank it off gratefully. I was wondering how 
best I could sneak out and groom myself properly. But there 
was no chance. My father's architectural sense had not gone 
beyond building a single large hall and a kitchen. Of course, 
there was the front pyol on which visitors and menfolk gener- 
ally sat. But how could I ask Rosie to move there? It was too 
public — the shopboy and all his visitors would come round, 
gape at her and ask if she was married. This was a little diffi- 
cult situation for me. We had got used to a common living in 
that hall. It had never occurred to us to be otherwise. We never 
wanted anything more than this. My father lived in his shop, I 
played under the tree, and we received male visitors on the out- 
side pyol and left the inner room for mother or any lady that 
might come. When we slept we went in. If it was warm, we 
slept on the pyol. The hall was a passage, a dressing-room, 
drawing-room, study, everything combined. My shaving mirror 

125 



was on a nail; my finest clothes hung on a peg; for a bath I 
dashed to a chamber in the back yard, half open to the sky, 
and poured over my head water drawn straight from the well. 
I ran up and down and conducted my toilet while my mother 
came into or out of the kitchen or slept or sat moping in the 
hall. We had got used to each other's presence and did not 
mind it in the least. But now with Rosie there? 

My mother, as if understanding my predicament, said to the 
girl, "I'm going to the well. Will you come with me? You are 
a city girl. You must know something of our village life too." 
The girl quietly rose and followed her; I hoped she'd not be 
subjected to an inquisition at the well. The minute their backs 
were turned I got busy, ran hither and hither, scraped my chin 
in a hurry, cut myself a little, bathed, groomed myself, and 
changed into better clothes, and by the time they were back 
from the well I was in a condition to be viewed by the Prin- 
cesses of the Earth. I went over to the shop and sent the boy 
to fetch Gaffur. 

"Rosie, if you would like to wash and dress, go ahead. I'll 
wait outside. We'll go out after that." 

It was perhaps an unwarranted luxury to engage Gaffur for 
an outing. But I saw no other way. I could not talk to her in 
our home, and I could not make her walk through the streets. 
Although I had done it before, today it seemed different. I felt 
a little abashed to be seen with her. 

I told Gaffur, "She is back." 

He said, "I know it. They were here at the hotel, and he 
went by the Madras train." 

"You never told me anything." 

"Why should I? You were going to know anyway." 

"What, what has happened?" 

"Ask the lady herself, now that you have her in your 
pocket." He sounded resentful. 

I told him placatingly, "Oh, don't be sour, Gaffur. ... I 
want the car for the t\ cning." 
126 



"Fm at your service, sir. What do I have the taxi for unless 
it is to drive you where you command?" He winked and I was 
relieved to see him back in his old cheerful mood. When Rosie 
appeared at the door I went and told my mother, "We will 
come back, Mother, after a little outing." 

"Where?" asked Gaffur, looking at us through the glass. As 
we hesitated he asked puckishly, "Shall I drive to the Peak 
House?" 

"No, no," Rosie cried, becoming very alert at the mention 
of it. "I have had enough of it." I didn't pursue the subject. 

As we passed the Taj I asked, "Would you like to eat there?" 

"Your mother gave me coffee; that is enough. What a fine 
mother you have!" 

"The only trouble is she asks you about marriage!" We 
laughed nervously at this joke. 

"Gaffur, drive on to the river," I said. He drove through the 
market road, honking his horn impatiently through the crowd. 
It was a crowded hour. Lots of people were moving around. 
The lights were up. Shop lights sparkled and lit up the thor- 
oughfare. He took a sharp turn at Ellaman Street — that narrow 
street in which oil-merchants lived, the oldest street in the city, 
with children playing in it, cows lounging, and donkeys and 
dogs blocking the passage so narrow that any passing car al- 
most touched the walls of the houses. Gaffur always chqse this 
way to the river, although there was a better approach. It gave 
him some sort of thrill to honk his car and scatter the creatures 
in the road in a fright. Ellaman Street ended with the last lamp 
on the road, and the road imperceptibly merged into the sand. 
He applied the brake under the last lamp, with a jerk sufficient 
to shake us out of the car. He was in an unusually jovial mood 
today; he was given to his own temperaments and moods, and 
no one could predict how he would behave at a given moment. 
We left him under the lamp. I said, "We want to walk about." 
He winked at me mischievously in reply. 

The evening had darkened. There were still a few groups 

127 



sitting here and there on the sand. Some students were prome- 
nading. Children were playing and running in circles and 
shouting. On the river step, some men were having their eve- 
ning dip. Far off at Nallappa's grove cattle were crossing the 
river with their bells tinkling. The stars were out. The Taluk 
office gong sounded seven. A perfect evening — as it had been 
for years and years. I had seen the same scene at the same hour 
for years and years. Did those children never grow up? I be- 
came a little sentimental and poetic, probably because of the 
companion at my side. My feelings and understanding seemed 
to have become suddenly heightened. I said, "It's a beautiful 
evening," to start a conversation. She briefly said, "Yes." We 
sought a secluded place, away from the route of promenading 
students. 

I spread out my handkerchief, and said, "Sit down, Rosie." 
She picked away the kerchief and sat down. The gathering 
darkness was congenial. I sat close to her and said, "Now tell 
me everything from beginning to end." 

She remained in thought for a while and said, "He left by 
the train this evening, and that is all." 

"Why did you not go with him?" 

"I don't know. It is what I came for. But it didn't happen 
that way. Well, it is just as well. We were not meant to be in 
each other's company.'* 

"Tell me what happened. Why were you so rude to me that 
day?" 

"I thought it best that we forgot each other, and that I went 
back to him." 

I did not know how to pursue this inquiry. I had no method 
of eliciting information — of all that had gone before. I fumbled 
and hummed and hawed in questioning, till I suddenly felt that 
I was getting nowhere at all. I wanted a chronological narra- 
tion, but she seemed imable to provide it. She was swinging 
forward and backward and talking in scraps. I was getting it 
128 



all in a knot. I felt exasperated. I said, "Answer me now, step 
by step. Give an answer to each question. I left you with him 
to speak about the proposal we had discussed. What did you 
tell him?" 

**What we had agreed — that he should permit me to dance. 
He was quite happy till I mentioned it. I never spoke about 
it that whole day or till late next day. I led him on to tell me 
about his own activity. He showed me the pictures he had 
copied, the notes he had made, and spoke far into the night 
about their significance. He was going to be responsible for 
the rewriting of history, he said. He was talking about his 
plans for publishing his work. He said later he would go to 
Mexico, and to some of the Far Eastern countries to study 
similar subjects and add them on to his work. I was full of 
enthusiasm, although I did not follow everything he said. I felt 
after all an understanding was coming between us — there in 
that lonely house, with trees rustling and foxes and animals 
prowling around, some light glimmering in the far-oflF valley. 
Next morning I went with him to the cave to have a look at 
the musical notations he had discovered. We had to pass 
through the main cave and beyond it into a vault by a crum- 
bling ladder. A fierce, terrifying place. Nothing on earth would 
have induced me to go to a spot like that, stuffy, fierce, and 
dark. 'There may be cobras here,' I said. He ignored my fears. 
*You should feel at home, then,' he said and we laughed. And 
then he lit up a lantern and showed me the wall on which he 
had scraped off the lime and discovered new pictures. They 
were the usual grotesque, ancient paintings of various figures, 
but he managed to spell out the letters around them, and take 
them down as musical notations. It was nothing I could make 
out or make use of. They were abstract verse about some 
theories of an ancient musical system or some such thing. I said, 
'If these were about dancing, I could perhaps have tried — ' He 
looked up sharply. The word 'dance' always stung him. I was 

129 



afraid to go on with the subject. But there, squatting on the 
ancient floor, amidst cobwebs and bats, in that dim lantern 
light, I felt courage coming back. 'Will you permit me to 
dance?' 

"Promptly came his reply, with a scowl, the old face was 
coming back. 'Why?' 

" *I think I'd be very happy if I could do that. I have so 
many ideas. I'd like to try. Just as you are trying to — ' 

" 'Oh, you want to rival me, is that it? This is a branch of 
learning, not street-acrobatics.' 

" 'You think dancing is street-acrobatics?* 

" 'I'm not prepared to discuss all that with you. An acrobat 
on a trapeze goes on doing the same thing all his life; well, your 
dance is like that. What is there intelligent or creative in it? 
You repeat your tricks all your life. We watch a monkey per- 
form, not because it is artistic but because it is a monkey that 
is doing it.' I swallowed all the insults; I still had hopes of con- 
verting him. I lapsed into silence and let him do his work. I 
turned the subject to other things, and he was normal again. 
After dinner that night he went back to his studies and I to 
my game-watching on the veranda. As usual, there was nothing 
to watch, but I sat there turning over in my head all that he 
had said and all that I had said, and wondering how to get 
through the business. I ignored all insults and troubles in the 
hope that if we reached agreement in the end, it'd all be for- 
gotten. As I sat there, he came behind me, and, putting his 
hand on my shoulder, said, 'I thought we had come to a final 
understanding about that subject. Did you or did you not 
promise that you'd never mention it again?' " 

The Taluk office gong sounded eight and all the crowd had 
vanished. We were alone on the sand. Still I'd not learned any- 
thing about Rosie. Gaffur sounded the horn. It was no doubt 
late, but if I went home she would not be able to speak. I said, 
"Shall we spend the night at the hotel?" 
130 



**No. Yd like to go back to your house. I have told your 
mother that I'll be back." 

"All right," I said, remembering my cash position. "Let us 
stay here for half an hour more. Now tell me." 

"His tone," she resumed, "was now so kind that I felt I need 
not bother even if I had to abandon my own plans once for 
all: if he was going to be so nice, I wanted nothing more — 
Fd almost made up my mind that I would ask nothing of him. 
Yet as a last trick I said, encouraged by his tone, *I want you 
to see just one small bit — ^which I generally do as a memento 
of my mother. It was her piece, you know.' I got up and pulled 
him by his hand to our room. I pushed aside the chair and 
other things. I adjusted my dress. I pushed him down to sit on 
the bed, as I had done with you. I sang that song about the 
lover and his girl on the banks of Jamuna and danced the piece 
for him. He sat watching me coldly. I had not completed the 
fifth Hne when he said, 'Stop, I have seen enough.' 

"I stopped, abashed. I'd been certain that he was going to be 
captivated by it and tell me to go ahead and dance all my life. 
But he said, 'Rosie, you must understand, this is not art. You 
have not sufficient training. Leave the thing alone.' 

"But here I committed a blunder. I said haughtily, 'Everyone 
except you likes it.' 

" Tor instance?' 

" *Well, Raju saw me do it, and he was transported. Do you 
know what he said?' 

" *Raju! Where did you do it for him?' 

" *At the hotel.' And then he said, 'Come and sit here,' point- 
ing at the chair, like an examining doctor. He subjected me to a 
close questioning. I think it went on all night. He asked details 
of our various movements ever since we came here, what time 
you came to the hotel each day, when you left, where you kept 
yourself in the room, and how long, and so on; all of which I 
had to answer. I broke down and cried. He got from my an- 

131 



swers enough indication of what we had been doing. Finally 
he said, *I didn't know that that hotel catered to such fervid 
art-lovers! I was a fool to have taken too much decency for 
granted.' Till dawn we sat there. He on the bed, and I on the 
chair. I was overcome with sleep and put my head on the table, 
and when I awoke he was gone to the caves. 

"Joseph had left some coffee for me. I tidied myself up and 
went down in search of him. I felt I had made the capital 
blunder of my life. I had been indiscreet in talking to him as I 
had been indiscreet and wrong in all my actions. I realized I 
had committed an enormous sin. I walked as in a dream down 
to the cave. My mind was greatly troubled. I didn't want any- 
thing more in life than to make my peace with him. I did not 
want to dance. I felt lost ... I was in terror. I was filled with 
some sort of pity for him too — as I remembered how he had 
sat up unmoving on the bed all night while I sat in the chair. 
The look of despair and shock in his face haunted me. I walked 
down the valley — hardly noticing my surroundings. If a tiger 
had crossed my path, I'd hardly have noticed it. ... I found 
him sitting in his cave, on his usual folding stool, sketching out 
his copies. His back was turned to the entrance when I went 
in. But as I got into the narrower entrance the light was 
blocked and he turned. He looked at me coldly. I stood like a 
prisoner at the bar. *I have come to apologize sincerely. I want 
to say I will do whatever you ask me to do. I committed a 
blunder. . . .' 

"He returned to his work without a word. He went on as 
if he had been alone. I waited there. Finally, when he had 
finished his day's work, he picked up his portfolio and papers 
and started out. He put on his helmet and spectacles and went 
past me as if I had not existed. I had stood there for nearly 
three hours, I think. He had measured, copied, noted down, 
and examined with a torch, but without paying the slightest 
attention to me. When he went back to the bungalow, I fol- 
lowed him. That's where you saw us. I went to his room. He 

132 



sat in his chair and I on the bed. No word or speech. You came 
into the room again. I sincerely hoped you would leave us and 
go away, and that we could be peaceful between ourselves. 
. . . Day after day it went on. I stayed on hopefully. I found 
that he would not eat the food I touched. So I let Joseph serve 
him. I ate my food alone in the kitchen. If I lay on the bed, he 
slept on the floor. So I took to sleeping on the floor, and he 
went and lay on the bed. He never looked at me or spoke. 
He arranged with Joseph and went down a couple of times, 
leaving me alone in the bungalow. He returned and went about 
his business without worrying about me. But I followed him, 
day after day, like a dog — ^waiting on his grace. He ignored 
me totally. I could never have imagined that one human being 
could ignore the presence of another human being so com- 
pletely. I followed him like a shadow, leaving aside all my own 
pride and self-respect; I hoped that ultimately he'd come 
round. I never left his side even for a moment, whether in his 
room or in the cave. It was a strain to remain speechless in 
that vast lonely place. I thought I had gone dumb. Joseph was 
the only one to whom I could say a word whenever he ap- 
peared, but he was a reserved man and did not encourage me. 
I had spent three weeks thus, in a vow of silence. I could not 
stand it any more. So one night as he sat at his table I said, 
*Have you not punished me enough?' My voice sounded 
strange, and like someone else's to me after so many weeks. It 
had a booming quality in that silent place that startled me. He 
started at the sound, turned, looked at me, and said, 'This is 
my last word to you. Don't talk to me. You can go where you 
please or do what you please.' 

" *I want to be with you. I want you to forget everything. 
I want you to forgive me — ' I said. Somehow I began to like 
him very much. It seemed enough if he forgave me and took 
me back. 

"But he said, *Yes, I'm trying to forget — even the earlier 
fact that I ever took a wife. I want to get out of here too — 

133 



but I have to complete my work; and I'm here for that. You 
are free to get out and do what you please.' 

" *rm your wife and I'm with you.' 

" 'You are here because I'm not a ruffian. But you are not 
my wife. You are a woman who will go to bed with anyone 
that flatters your antics. That's all. I don't, don't want you 
here, but if you are going to be here, don't talk. That is all.' 

"I felt too hurt. I thought that Othello was kindlier to 
Desdemona. But I bore everything. I had a wild hope that in 
the end he'd relent, that when we left this place he might 
change. Once we were back in our home, everything would be 
all right. 

"One day he started packing up. I tried to help him, but he 
would not let me; and then I packed up my things too, and 
followed him. Gaffur's car arrived. Both of us came down to 
the hotel. Back in Twenty-eight. The room looked poisonous 
to me now. He stayed for a day settling accounts; and at train 
time he went with the baggage to the railway station. I fol- 
lowed him mutely. I waited patiently. I knew he was going 
back to our home at Madras. I wanted very much to go back 
home. The porter carried our trunks. He pointed at my por- 
tion of the baggage and told the porter, 'I don't know about 
these — not mine.' So the porter looked at me for a second and 
separated my box. When the train arrived the porter carried 
only his baggage, and he took his seat in a compartment. I 
didn't know what to do. I picked up my trunk and followed. 
When I tried to step into the compartment he said, *I have no 
ticket for you,' and he flourished a single ticket and shut the 
door on me. The train moved. I came to your home." 

She sat sobbing for a while. I comforted her. "You are in the 
right place. Forget all your past. We will teach that cad a les- 
son by and by." I made a grandiose announcement. "First, I'll 
make the world recognize you as the greatest artist of the 
time." 

134 



Within a short time my mother understood everything. When 
Rosie had gone in for a bath, she said, cornering me, "This 
cannot go on long, Raju — you must put an end to it." 

"Don't interfere, Mother. I am an adult. I know what I am 
doing." 

"You can't have a dancing girl in your house. Every morn- 
ing with all that dancing and everything going on! What is 
the home coming to?" 

Encouraged by me, Rosie had begun to practice. She got up 
at five in the morning, bathed, and prayed before the picture 
of a god in my mother's niche, and began a practice session 
which went on for nearly three hours. The house rang with 
the jingling of her anklets. She ignored her surroundings com- 
pletely, her attention being concentrated upon her movements 
and steps. After that she helped my mother, scrubbed, washed, 
swept, and tidied up everything in the house. My mother was 
pleased with her and seemed kind to her. I never thought that 
my mother would create a problem for me now, but here she 
was. I said, "What has come over you all of a sudden?'* 

My mother paused. "I was hoping you would have the sense 
to do something about it. It can't go on like this forever. What 
will people say?" 

"Who are 'people?' " I asked. 

"Well, my brother and your cousins and others known to 
us." 

"I don't care for their opinion. Just don't bother about such 
things." 

"Oh! That's a strange order you are giving me, my boy. I 
can't accept it." 

The gentle singing in the bathroom ceased; my mother 
dropped the subject and went away as Rosie emerged from her 
bath fresh and blooming. Looking at her, one would have 
thought that she had not a care in the world. She was quite 

135 



happy to be doing what she was doing at the moment, was not 
in the least bothered about the past, and looked forward tre- 
mendously to the future. She was completely devoted to my 
mother. 

But unfortunately my mother, for all her show of tenderness, 
was beginning to stiffen inside. She had been hstening to gossip, 
and she could not accommodate the idea of living with a tainted 
woman. I was afraid to be cornered by her, and took care not 
to face her alone. But whenever she could get at me, she hissed 
a whisper into my ear. "She is a real snake woman, I tell you. 
I never liked her from the first day you mentioned her." 

I was getting annoyed with my mother's judgment and 
duplicity. The girl, in all innocence, looked happy and care- 
free and felt completely devoted to my mother. I grew anxious 
lest my mother should suddenly turn round and openly tell her 
to quit. I changed my tactics and said, "You are right. Mother. 
But you see, she is a refugee, and we can't do anything. We 
have to be hospitable." 

"Why can't she go to her husband and fall at his feet? You 
know, living with a husband is no joke, as these modem girls 
imagine. No husband worth the name was ever conquered by 
powder and lipstick alone. You know, your father more than 
once . . ." She narrated an anecdote about the trouble created 
by my father's unreasonable, obstinate attitude in some family 
matter and how she met it. I listened to her anecdote patiently 
and with admiration, and that diverted her for a while. After a 
few days she began to allude to the problems of husband and 
wife whenever she spoke to Rosie, and filled the time with 
anecdotes about husbands: good husbands, mad husbands, rea- 
sonable husbands, unreasonable ones, savage ones, slightly de- 
ranged ones, moody ones, and so on and so forth; but it was 
always the wife, by her doggedness, perseverance, and pa- 
tience, that brought him round. She quoted numerous mytho- 
logical stories of Savitri Seetha, and all the well-known hero- 

136 



ines. Apparently it was a general talk, apropos of nothing, but 
my mother's motives were naively clear. She was so clumsily 
roundabout that anyone could see what she was driving at. She 
was still supposed to be ignorant of Rosie's affairs, but she 
talked pointedly. I knew how Rosie smarted under these les- 
sons, but I was helpless. I was afraid of my mother. I could 
have kept Rosie in a hotel, perhaps, but I was forced to take a 
more realistic view of my finances now. I was helpless as I saw 
Rosie suffer, and my only solace was that I suffered with her. 

My worries were increasing. The boy at the shop was becom- 
ing more clamorous. My sales were poor, as the railways were 
admitting more peddlers on the platforms. My cash receipts 
were going down and my credit sales alone flourished. The 
wholesale merchants who supplied me with goods stopped 
credit to me. The boy's method of account-keeping was so 
chaotic that I did not know whether I was moving forward or 
backward. He produced cash from the counter in a haphazard 
manner, and there were immense gaps on the shelves all over 
the shop. The boy was probably pocketing money and eating 
off the stuff. With my credit at the wholesalers' gone, the 
public complained that nothing one wanted was ever available. 
Suddenly the railways gave me notice to quit. I pleaded with 
the old stationmaster and porter, but they could do nothing; 
the order had come from high up. The shop was given to a 
new contractor. 

I could not contemplate the prospect af being cut off from 
the railways. I grew desperate and angry. I shed tears at seeing 
a new man in the place where I and my father had sat. I slapped 
the boy on the cheek and he cried, and his father, the porter, 
came down on me and said, "This is what he gets for helping 
you! I'd always told the boy — He was not your paid servant, 
anyway." 

"Payment for him? He has swallowed all the cash, credit, 

137 



and every consumable article in the shop. Fattened himself on 
it! He must pay me for all his gluttony, which has ruined my 
business." 

"It's not he who has ruined you, but the saithan inside, 
which makes you talk like this." He meant Rosie, I'm sure; 
she was peeping out of the doorway of our house. My mother 
watched from the pyol in great pain. It was a most unedifying 
spectacle. 

I did not like the porter's reference, and so said something 
violent and tried to attack him. The stationmaster appeared on 
the scene and said, "If you create a disturbance here, I'll have 
to prohibit your entry." 

The new shopman watched the scene with detachment. A 
whiskered fellow — I did not like his leering look. I turned on 
him fiercely, leaving the porter, and cried, "Well, you'll also 
face the same situation, remember, some day. Don't be too 
sure." 

He twirled his whiskers and said, "How can everyone hope 
for the same luck as yours?" He winked mischievously, at 
which I completely lost my temper and flew at him. He re- 
pelled me with a back-stroke of his left hand as if swatting a 
fly, and I fell back, and knocked against my mother — who had 
come running onto the platform, a thing she had never done 
in her life. Luckily, I didn't knock her down. 

She clung to my arm and screamed, "Q)me away. Are you 
coming or not?" And the porter, the whiskered man, and 
everyone swore, "You are saved today, because of that vener- 
able old lady." She dragged me back to the house; a few 
batches of paper, a register, and one or two odd personal be- 
longings which I had kept in the shop were under my arm; 
with these I entered my house, and I knew my railway associa- 
tion was now definitely ended. It made my heart heavy. I felt 
so gloomy that I did not turn to see Rosie standing aside, 
staring at me. I flung myself in a corner of the hall and shut 
my eyes. 

138 



Chapter Eight 



4xS^^>^^x$>^>^>^^$^xSxSx$^^>^^xS. 



My creditor was the Salt, a wholesale merchant in Market 
Road. He called on me the next day. There was a knock on 
the door, and there he was. I was watching Rosie at her prac- 
tice, leaning against the wall and lounging on the mat. I felt 
abashed at the sight of the Sait at my door. I knew why he had 
come. He had brought a fat ledger wrapped up in a blue cloth. 
He seemed pleased at the sight of me, as if he had feared that 
I had run away from my post. I was at a loss to say anything 
for a moment. I didn't want to show confusion. After the 
railway-station episode, I was recovering my sense of perspec- 
tive again. While watching Rosie do her practice I seemed to 
get a clearer notion of what I should be doing. The sound of 
her anklets, and the whispered music she sang, her rhythm and 
movement, helped. I felt that I was once again becoming a man 
of importance. My mother, fortunately for me, had not spoken 
a word to me since the previous evening, and that saved me a 
great deal of embarrassment and strain. My mother could not 
help speaking to Rosie; in spite of all her prejudice, she liked 
the girl really and could not help treating her kindly. She had 
not the heart to starve her or offend her in any way. She at- 
tended on her enough to give her food and shelter, and left 
her alone. Only she could not trust herself to speak to me after 
the scene at the railway station. I am sure she felt that I had 
ruined, by my erratic ways, what her husband had so labori- 
ously built up. But fortunately she did not take it out on the 

139 



poor girl, but let her alone — after her usual dose of homilies 
and parables, all of which Rosie took in good humor. 

The Sait was a thin man with a multicolored turban on his 
head. He was a prosperous businessman, very helpful with 
credit, but, of course, expected proper settlement of debts. He 
was at my door. I knew why. I fussed over him, and said, 
"Come on, come on. Be seated. What a rare pleasure!" I 
dragged him and seated him on the pyol. 

He was a good friend of mine, and he hesitated to talk about 
the dues. There was an awkward silence for a moment. Only 
Rosie's anklet-jingles could be heard for a while. He listened 
to it and asked, "What is it?" 

"Oh!" I said casually. "A dance practice is going on." 

"Dance practice!" He was astounded. It was the last thing he 
expected in a home like mine. He sat thinking for a while, as 
if putting two and two together. He shook his head lightly. 
The story of the ^^saithan inside" had evidently reached him. 
He suppressed any inquiry regarding it as not his business, and 
said, "What has come over you, Raju? You have not paid my 
dues for months and months, and you used to be so regular!" 

"Business conditions have not been good, old man," I said 
with a sort of affected resignation and cheer. 

"No, it's not that. One must — " 

"Oh, and that boy whom I trusted cheated completely." 

*'What is the use of blaming others?" he asked. He seemed 
to be a ruthless man, who was bent upon harrassing me. He 
took out his notebook, opened it out, and pointed at the bottom 
of a column. "Eight thousand rupees! I can't let this go on 
very long. You will have to do something about it." 

I was tired of being told to do "something" about some- 
thing. My mother started it with regard to the girl, someone 
else about something else, the girl had started to say, "We must 
do something," and now this man; I felt irritated by his advice 
and said curtly, "I know it." 

"What do you propose to do about it?" 
140 



"Of course you are going to be paid — " 

"When?" 

"How can I say? . . . You must wait." 

"All right. You want another week?" he asked. 

"Week!" I laughed at the joke. He looked hurt. Everyone 
seemed hurt by me at this time. 

He became very serious and said, "Do you think it is a laugh- 
ing matter? Do you think I have come to amuse you?" 

"Why do you raise your voice, Sait? Let us be friends." 

"Friendship has nothing to do with this," he said, lowering 
his voice. When he raised it the jingling inside could not be 
heard. But when he lowered it we could hear Rosie's steps in 
the background. A smile, perhaps, played over my lips as I 
visualized her figure on the other side of the wall. He felt irri- 
tated at this again. "What, sir, you laugh when I say I want 
money, you smile as if you were dreaming. Are you in this 
world or in paradise? I came to talk to you in a businesslike 
manner today, but it is not possible. All right, don't blame me." 
He bundled up his account book and rose to go. 

"Don't go, Sait. Why are you upset?" I asked. Everything 
I said unfortunately seemed to have a ring of levity about it. 
He stiffened and grew more serious. The more he scowled, the 
more I found it impossible to restrain myself. I don't know 
what devil was provoking so much mirth in me at this most 
inappropriate moment. I was bubbling with laughter, I sup- 
pressed a tremendous urge to giggle. Somehow his seriousness 
affected me in this way. Finally, when he turned away from 
me in utter wrath, the profound solemnity of this puny man 
with his ledger clutched under his arm and his multicolored 
turban struck me as so absurd that I was convulsed with laugh- 
ter. He turned his head, threw a brief glance at me, and was 
off. 

With a smiling face, I re-entered the house and took up my 
position on the mat. Rosie paused for a second to ask, "Some- 
thing very amusing? I heard your laughter." 

141 



**Yes, yes, something that made me laugh.** 

"Who was he?" she asked. 

"A friend," I said. I did not want her to know these troubles. 
I didn't want anyone to be bothered with these things. I did 
not like to be bothered by anything. Living with Rosie under 
the same roof was enough for me. I wanted nothing more in 
life. I was slipping into a fool's paradise. By not talking about 
money, I felt I had dismissed the subject — a stupid assumption. 
The world outside Rosie seemed so unreal that it was possible 
for me to live on such an assumption. But not for long. 

Within a week or ten days I found myself involved in court 
affairs. My sense of humor had completely ruined my relations 
with the Sait, and he had proceeded directly to get satisfaction 
through a court. My mother was distraught. I had not a friend 
in the world except Gaffur. I sought him out one day at the 
fountain parapet and told him where I stood. I was returning 
from the court. He was all sympathy and said, "Have you a 
lawyer?" 

"Yes. The one there over the cotton godown." 

"Oh — he is the adjournment expert. He can keep the case 
going for years. So don't worry. Is it a civil suit or criminal 
suit?" 

"Criminal! They have made out a case against me that, when 
he came to ask for his dues, I threatened to beat him. I wish I 
had done so!" 

"What a pity! If it were a civil case, it could go on for years, 
and you would be none the worse for it while it lasted. Have 
you got that in your house?" he asked slyly. I gave him a fierce 
look. And he said, "How can I blame a woman for what you 
are? . . . Why don't you look after tourists again?" 

"I can't go near the railway station now. The railway staff 
are going to depose against me, to prove that I beat people up." 

"Is it true?" 

"Hm. If I catch the porter's son, I'm going to wring his 
neck," 
142 



"Don't do such things, Raju; you will not help yourself. You 
have brought sufficient confusion on yourself. Do pull yourself 
together. Why don't you do sensible things?" 

I thought this over. I said, "If I had five hundred rupees, I 
could start a new life." I outlined to him a plan to utilize 
Rosie's services and make money. The thought of her warmed 
me up. "She is a gold-mine," I cried. "If I had money to start 
her with — oh!" My visions soared. I said to him, "You know 
Bharat Natvam is really the greatest art business today. There 
is such a craze for it that people will pay anything to see the 
best. I cannot do anything about it because I have no money. 
Can't you help me, Gaffur?" He was amused at my request. It 
was now my turn to feel upset at laughter. I said, "I have done 
so much for your business." 

He was essentially a man of heart. He appealed to my reason. 
"I'm not a rich man, Raju. You know how I borrow money 
for even the upkeep of the car. If I had five hundred, I'd let 
my passengers ride on better tires. No, no, Raju. . . . Listen 
to my advice. Send her away and try to get back to ordinary, 
real life. Don't talk all this art business. It's not for us." 

On hearing this, I grew so upset that I said something to hurt 
him. He got back into his driving seat with a serious face. "If 
you like a drive any time, call me; that's all I can do to help 
you. And, remember, I'm not asking for the old dues from 
you—" 

"Set it off against the commission due to me for all your 
Peak House trips," I said haughtily. 

"Very well," he said, and started his car. "Call me any time 
you may want the car; it's always there. I pray that God may 
give you better sense." He was off. I knew here was another 
friend passing out of my life. 

Unfortunately, he was not the last. My mother's turn cnme 
soon. I was rapt, watching Rosie do a piece called "The Danc- 
ing Feet." Rosie said she had introduced a couple of variations, 

143 



and wanted me to give my opinion. I was becoming a sort of 
expert on these matters nowadays. I watched her critically, 
but what I watched were the curves that tempted me to hug 
her on the spot. But my mother was passing in and out, and 
nowadays we had to seize our romantic moments and get 
through with it at odd times — for instance, when my mother 
went to fetch water. We knew exactly how long she would 
be away and utilized it. It was all irksome, but very novel, and 
made me forget my troubles. Whenever I watched her sway 
her figure, if there was no one about I constantly interrupted 
her performance, although I was supposed to watch her from 
an art critic's point of view. She pushed me away with "What 
has come over you?" She was a devoted artist; her passion for 
physical love was falling into place and had ceased to be a pri- 
mary obsession with her. 

I had a little money still left in the savings, although I gave 
no hint of it to anyone. A couple of days after the Salt's com- 
ing, I drew the entire amount from the bank. I did not want it 
to be seized. This was keeping us. I had a small lawyer handling 
my case in the court. I had to give him part of my money for 
court fees and such things. He had his office in the attic of a 
cotton shop in Market Road — a choking place with one shelf 
of books, one table, one chair, and one bench for clients. He 
had spotted me on the very first day while I was loitering with 
terror in my eyes, obeying the first summons. He had ingrati- 
ated himself into my favor while I waited in the corridor. He 
asked, "Did you hit the Salt, really? Speak the truth to me.'* 

"No, sir. It's a lie." 

"Evidently they want to bring in a criminal motive to 
quicken the procedure. We will dispute that first, and then the 
civil; we've a lot of time. Don't worry. I'll deal with all that. 
How much money have you in your pocket?" 

"Only five rupees." 

"Give it here." If I had said "two" he'd probably have been 
content to take that. He pocketed it, held up a sheet of paper 
144 



for my signature, and said, "That's right. It fixes all your affairs 
up nicely." 

At the court I was asked to go behind an enclosure 
while the judge looked at me. The Salt was there with his 
notebook, and he had his lawyer, of course; we glared at each 
other. His lawyer said something; my five-rupee lawyer said 
something, gesticulating in my direction; and the court servant 
patted my back and told me to go. My lawyer nodded to me. 
It was all over before I could understand anything. My lawyer 
met me outside. "Managed to get an adjournment. I'll tell you 
the next date later. Meet me at my office, over the cotton go- 
down — come by the staircase on the side lane." He was off. If 
this was all the bother there was, I felt I could get through 
it easily. I was in excellent hands. 

I told my mother on returning from the court, "There is 
nothing to worry about. Mother; it's going nicely." 

"He may throw us out of this house. Where will you go 
after that?" 

"Oh, all that will take a long time. Don't unduly burden 
your mind," I cried. 

She gave me up in despair. "I don't know what is coming 
over you. You don't take anything seriously nowadays." 

"It's because I know what to worry about; that's all," I said 
grandly. 

Nowadays our domestic discussions were carried on in the 
presence of Rosie. No privacy was needed; we had got used 
to her. Rosie behaved as if she did not hear these domestic 
matters. She looked fixedly at the floor or at the pages of a 
book (the only things I managed to salvage from our shop), 
and moved off to a corner of the hall, as if to be out of earshot. 
She did not, even when she was alone with me, embarrass me 
by asking any question about our affairs. 

My mother had adjusted herself to my ways as an unmiti- 
gated loafer, and I thought she had resigned herself to them. 
But she had her own scheme of tackling me. One morning as 

H5 



I was watching Rosie's footwork with the greatest concentra- 
tion, my uncle dropped in like a bolt from the blue. He was 
my mother's elder brother, an energetic landowner in my 
mother's village who had inherited her parents' home and was 
a sort of general adviser and director of all our family matters. 
Marriages, finances, funerals, litigation, for everything he was 
consulted by all the members of the family — my mother and 
her three sisters, scattered in various parts of the district. He 
seldom left his village, as he conducted most of his leadership 
by correspondence. I knew my mother was in touch with him 
— a postcard a month, closely written, from him would fill her 
with peace and happiness for weeks and she would ceaselessly 
talk about it. It was his daughter that she wanted me to marry 
— a proposal which she fortunately pushed into the back- 
ground, in view of recent developments. 

Here entered the man himself, standing at the door and call- 
ing in his booming voice, "Sister!" I scrambled to my feet and 
ran to the door. My mother came hurrying from the kitchen. 
Rosie stopped her practice. The man was six feet, darkened 
by the sun from working in the fields, and had a small knotted 
tuft on his skull; he wore a shirt with an upper cloth, his dhoti 
was brown, not white like a townsman's. He carried a bag of 
jute material in his hand (with a green print of Mahatma 
Gandhi on it), and a small trunk. He went straight to the 
kitchen, took out of the bag a cucumber, a few limes, and 
plantains and greens, saying, "These are for my sister, grown 
in our gardens." He placed them on the floor of the kitchen 
for his sister. He gave a few instructions as to how to cook 
them. 

My mother became very happy at the sight of him. She said, 
"Wait, I'll give you coffee." 

He stood there explaining how he came by a bus, what he had 
been doing when he received my mother's letter, and so on 
and so forth. It was a surprise to me to know that she had writ- 
146 



ten to him to come. She had not told me. "You never told me 
you wrote to Uncle!" I said. 

"Why should she tell you?" snapped my uncle. "As if you 
were her master!" I knew he was trying to pick a quarrel with 
me. He lowered his voice to a whisper, pulled me down by 
the collar of my shirt, and asked, "What is all this one hears 
about you? Very creditable development you are showing, my 
boy. Anybody would be proud of you!" I wriggled myself 
free and frowned. He said, "What has come over you? You 
think yourself a big man? I can't be frightened of scapegraces 
like you. Do you know what we do when we get an intractable 
bull calf? We castrate it. We will do that to you, if you don't 
behave." 

My mother went on minding the boiling water as if she 
didn't notice what went on between us. I had thought she 
would come to my support, but she seemed to enjoy my 
predicament, having designed it herself. I felt confused and 
angry. I walked out of the place. This man attacking me in my 
own house, within five minutes of arrival! I felt too angry. As 
I moved out I could overhear my mother speaking to him in 
whispers. I could guess what she was saying. I went back to 
my mat, rather shaken. 

Rosie was standing where I had left her with her hip slightly 
out, her arm akimbo. She was like one of those pillar carvings 
in the temples. The sight of her filled me with a sudden nostal- 
gia for the days when I took people to see the old temples and 
I sighed for the variety of life and contacts and experience I 
used to have. Rosie looked a little scared. "Who is he?" she 
asked in a low tone. 

"Don't bother about him. He must be crazy. You don't have 
to worry." 

That was enough for her. My guidance was enough. She 
accepted it in absolutely unquestioning faith and ignored 
everything else completely. It gave me a tremendous confi- 

H7 



dence in myself and seemed to enhance my own dimensions. I 
told her, "You need not stop your dance. You may go on with 
it." 

"But, but — " She indicated my uncle. 

"Forget his existence completely," I said. I was in a very 
challenging mood, but inside me I trembled still to think what 
my uncle might have to say. "You don't have to bother about 
anyone except me," I said with sudden authority. (iMy uncle 
used to be called in to frighten me when I was a boy.) "This 
is my house. I do as I please here. If people don't like me, they 
need not visit me; that is all." I laughed weakly. 

What was the use of pouring out all these challenging state- 
ments to this girl? She resumed her song and dance, and I sat 
observing her, with extra attention as if I were her teacher. I 
observed my uncle peep out of the kitchen, and so I made my- 
self more deliberately teacher-like. I issued commands and 
directions to Rosie. My uncle watched my antics from the 
kitchen. Rosie went on with her practice as if she were in her 
private room. My uncle presently came over to watch, his eyes 
bulging with contempt and cynicism. I ignored him com- 
pletely. He watched for a moment, and let out a loud "Hm! 
So this is what is keeping you busy! Hm! Hm! Never dreamed 
that anyone in our family would turn out to be a dancer's 
backstage boy!" 

I remained silent for a while before mustering courage and 
resolution to attack him. He mistook my silence for fear and 
brought out another of his broadsides. "Your father's spirit 
will be happy to see you now, literally groveling at the feet 
of a dancing girl." 

He was out to provoke me. I turned round and said, "If you 
have come to see your sister, you had better go in and stay 
with her. Why do you come where I am?" 

"Aha!" he cried, delighted. "Good to see some spirit in you. 
There is still hope for you, although you need not try it on 
your uncle first. Did I not mention a moment ago what we do 
148 



to recalcitrant bull calves?" He was squatting on the floor 
now, sipping his coffee. 

"Don't be vulgar," I said. "At your age too!" 

"Hey, wench!" he cried to Rosie, addressing her in the sin- 
gular, or something even lower than singular. "Now stop your 
music and all those gesticulations and listen to me. Are you of 
our family?" He waited for an answer. She stopped her dance 
and simply stared at him. He said, "You are not of our family? 
Are you of our clan?" He again waited for her to answer and 
answered himself. "No. Are you of our caste? No. Our class? 
No. Do we know you? No. Do you belong to this house? No. 
In that case, why are you here? After all, you are a dancing 
girl. We do not admit them in our families. Understand? You 
seem to be a good, sensible girl. You should not walk into a 
house like this and stay on. Did anyone invite you? No. Even 
if you are invited you should go on staying where you belong, 
and not too long there. You cannot stay like this in our house. 
It is very inconvenient. You should not be seducing young 
fools, deserting your husband. Do you follow?" She sank down 
at this onslaught, covering her face with her hands. My uncle 
was evidently gratified at the success of his efforts, and pro- 
ceeded to drive home his point. "You see, you should not pre- 
tend to cry at these things. You must understand why we say 
such things. You must clear out by the next train. You must 
promise to go. We will give you money for your railway 
ticket." 

At this a big sob burst from her. I was completely maddened 
by it. I flew at my uncle and knocked the cup out of his hand, 
shouting, "Get out of this house." 

He picked himself up, saying, "You tell me to get out. Has it 
come to this? Who are you, puppy, to ask me to get out? I'll 
make you get out. This is my sister's house. You go out if you 
want enjoyment with dancing girls — " 

My mother came running out of the kitchen with tears in 
her eyes. She flew straight at the sobbing Rosie, crying, "Are 

149 



you now satisfied with your handiwork, you she-devil, you 
demon. Where have you dropped on us from? Everything was 
so good and quiet — until you came; you came in like a viper. 
Bah! I have never seen anyone work such havoc on a young 
fool! What a fine boy he used to be! The moment he set his 
eyes on you, he was gone. On the very day I heard him men- 
tion the 'serpent girl' my heart sank. I knew nothing good 
could come out of it." I didn't interrupt my mother; I allowed 
her all the speech she wanted to work off feelings she had 
bottied up all these weeks. She then catalogued all my misdeeds 
down to my latest appearance in the court, and how I was going 
to lose even this house, so laboriously built by my father. 

The girl looked up with her tear-drenched face and said 
amidst sobs, "I will go away. Mother. Don't speak so harshly. 
You were so good to me all these days." 

My uncle now interrupted to tell his sister, "This is your 
mistake, sister. That wench is right in a way. Why should you 
have been so good to her? You should have told her at the be- 
ginning what was what." 

I seemed powerless to suppress this man or send him away. 
He said what he liked and stayed where he liked. Unless I 
physically pushed him out, there was no way of saving poor 
Rosie; but he could knock me flat if I laid hands on him. I 
was appalled at the somersault in my mother's nature the 
moment she got support in the shape of a brother. I went over 
to Rosie, put my arm around her to the shock of the two (my 
uncle cried, "The fellow has lost all shame!"), and whispered 
to her, "Shut your ears to all that they say. Let them say what 
they like. Let them exhaust themselves. But you are not leav- 
ing. I'm going to be here, and you are going to be here. Others 
who don't like the arrangement are welcome to leave." 

Thus they went on a little longer, and when they could say 
nothing more they retired to the kitchen. I never spoke a word 
more. I learned a great secret, that of shutting my ears, and I 
felt happy that Rosie too could put herself through this harden- 
150 



ing process, absolutely relying on my support. She lifted her 
head and sat up, watching the household coldly. My mother 
called me in to eat when food was ready. I took care to see 
that Rosie was also fed. My mother didn't call us until she had 
fed my uncle on the vegetables he had brought and had cooked 
them according to his specifications. After food he went over 
to the pyol, spread out his upper cloth, sat on it munching pan, 
and then lay down on the cool floor to sleep. I felt relieved to 
hear his snores. The calm after the storm was absolute. My 
mother served us food without looking at us. A great silence 
reigned in the house. It continued until three-thirty in the 
afternoon. 

My uncle renewed the fight by coming in to announce to all 
whom it might concern, "An hour more for the train. Is the 
passenger ready?" He looked at Rosie sitting below a window 
and reading. She looked up, disturbed. I never left her side that 
whole afternoon. Whatever people might say, I wanted to be 
near at hand to support her. As long as my uncle remained in 
town there could be no relaxation of. the vigil. I'd have given 
anything to know when my uncle would be leaving. But he 
was a man of independent notions and was not affected by my 
genuine desire to have him go. 

Rosie looked up, slightly scared. I held a hand up to give 
her courage. My mother came out of her corner and, looking 
kindly at Rosie, said, "Well, young woman, it has been nice 
having you, but you know, it is time for you to go." She was 
trying new tactics now, of kindliness and a make-believe that 
Rosie had agreed to leave. "Rosie, girl, you know the train is at 
four-thirty. Have you packed up all your things? I found your 
clothes scattered here and there." 

Rosie blinked unhappily. She did not know how to answer. 
I intervened to say, "Mother, she is not going anywhere." 

My mother appealed to me. "Have some sense, Raju. She is 
another man's wife. She must go back to him." 

There was such calm logic in what she said, I had nothing 

151 



more to do but repeat blindly, "She can't go anywhere, Mother. 
She has got to stay here." 

And then my mother brought out her trump card. "If she 
is not going, I have to leave the house," she said. 

My uncle said, "Did you think she was helpless, and only a 
dependent on you?" He thumped his chest and cried, "As long 
as I am breathing, I will never let down a sister." 

I appealed to my mother. "You don't have to go. Mother." 

"Then throw that wench's trunk out and give her a push 
toward the railway, and your mother will stay. What do you 
take her for? You think she is the sort that can keep company 
with all kinds of dancing — " 

"Shut up. Uncle," I said, and I was taken aback by my own 
temerity. I feared he might repeat his threat to recalcitrant 
bulls. Fortunately, he said, "Who are you, puppy, to say if I 
am to shut up or speak? You think I notice you? Are you 
sending that . . . that . . . out or not? That's all we want to 
know." 

"No; she is not going," I said very calmly. 

He heaved a sigh, glared at the girl, looked at my mother. 
"Well, sister, you must starting packing, then. We will go by 
the evening bus." 

My mother said, "All right. I can pack in a minute." 

"Don't go, Mother," I pleaded. 

"See that girl's obstinacy. She watches it all so calmly," said 
my uncle. 

Rosie pleaded, "Mother, don't go." 

"Oho!" said my uncle. "She has reached the stage of ad- 
dressing you as Mother. Next she will be calling me Uncle-in- 
law, I suppose." He turned to me with a horrible grin and said, 
"Your mother needn't quit really. This house is hers for her 
lifetime. If I had had her cooperation, I'd have shown you a 
few nice tricks today. She would have stayed on till the end. 
My brother-in-law was no fool. He made you master of only 
one-half of the home. ..." All of a sudden he entered into 

152 



legal complexities, arising from my father's will, and described 
how he would have tackled the whole situation if he had been 
in my mother's position, and how he would have disputed 
every inch of the ground and taken the matter to the Supreme 
Court, and how he would have shown the world what to do 
with scapegraces who had no respect for family traditions but 
yet tried to enjoy their ancestors' hard-earned wealth. I was 
relieved as long as he waxed eloquent over legalities, as it 
helped him forget Rosie for the time being. True to the tra- 
dition of the landed gentry, he found litigation an engrossing 
subject. But the spell was broken when my mother came in to 
say, "I'm ready." She had picked up a few clothes here and 
there. Her large steel trunk, which had never been moved from 
its place in a comer for decades and decades, was packed and 
ready to be lifted out. She had a basket with a handle into 
which she had thrown a few copper and brass vessels. My uncle 
announced, "These belong to our house, given by my father 
when this girl, my dear sister, married and was going to set 
up her own family. It's our gift to her, and so don't gaze on it 
with such a look." 

I looked away and said, "She certainly can take what she 
likes. Nobody will say anything." 

"Aha, you are proud of that, are you?" he said. "You are 
showing a lot of liberahty to your mother, aren't you?" 

I had never in my hfe seen him so unpleasant. We had al- 
ways been in terror of him when we were children, but this 
was the first occasion I had seen so much of him as an adult. 
My mother looked saddened rather than angry, and seemed 
almost ready to come to my rescue. She interrupted him 
sharply to say with extraordinary consideration in her voice, 
"I need nothing more. This will do." She picked up several 
small prayer-books, which she read every day of her life before 
her midday meal, sitting before the pictures of the god, in 
meditation. I had seen her for years at the same time sitting 
with closed eyes in front of the niche in the wall, and it now 

153 



filled me with sadness that I would not see her there any more. 
I followed her about the house as she picked out her articles 
and packed. My uncle, as if to keep an eye on me, followed 
my steps. Apparently he feared I might induce my mother to 
stay on. 

In spite of his supervision, I asked, "Mother, when will you 
be back?" 

She hesitated to answer, and said finally, "I'll — I'll — let us 
see. 

"The moment she gets a telegram that the line is clear," said 
Uncle and added, "We are not the sort to let down our sisters, 
remember. That house in the village is always hers to return 
to; so that she has not got to be at anybody's mercy. Our house 
belongs to our sister as much as to us," he added boastfully. 

"Don't fail to light the lamps in the god's niche," said my 
mother, going down the steps. "Be careful with your health." 
Uncle carried the trunks and she carried the basket. Soon they 
were at the end of the street and turned the corner. I stood 
on the step watching. At the threshold stood Rosie. I was 
afraid to turn round and face her, because I was crying. 

We were a married couple to all appearances. Rosie cooked 
the food, and kept the house. I seldom went out except to do 
a little shopping. All day long she danced and sang. I made 
love to her constantly and was steeped in an all-absorbing 
romanticism, until I woke up to the fact that she was really 
getting tired of it all. Some months passed before she asked 
me, "What are your plans?" 

"Plans!" said the sleeper, awakening. "What plans?" 
She smiled at this and said, "There you are, always lying on 
the mat watching me or holding me in your arms. I have now 
good practice — I can manage a show of four hours, although 
with accompaniments it would have been much more help- 
ful—" 

154 



I 



"Fm here, accompanying and marking time for you. What 
other accompaniment do you want?** 

"I need a full orchestra. We have stayed indoors long 
enough/' she said. I found her so earnest that I had not the 
courage to joke any more. 

I said, "I'm also thinking. Very soon we must do something." 

" *Rosie' is a silly name,'* I said as a first step after two days 
of hard thinking. "The trouble with you is that although your 
people are a traditional dance family, they didn't know how 
to call you. For our public purpose, your name must be 
changed. What about Meena Kumari?" 

She shook her head. "It's no better. I see no reason to change 
my name.** 

"You don't understand, my dear girl. It's not a sober or 
sensible name. If you are going to appear before the public 
with that name, they will think it's someone with cheap tricks, 
such as those we see in gambling side-shows. For a classical 
dancer, you should call yourself something that is poetic and 
appealing." 

She realized that there was a point in what I said, and she 
picked up a pad and pencil and noted down all the names that 
came into her head. I added my own. We wanted to see how 
they sounded and also how they looked on paper. Sheet after 
sheet was filled up and discarded. It became a sort of joke. We 
seemed to be forgetting our main job in enjoying the fun. 
Each name had something ridiculous about it, comic-sounding 
or an impossible association. At dead of night she sat up to ask, 
**What about ?" 

"The name of the wife of a demon-king — people will be 
frightened," I said. Eventually, after four days of hard thinking 
and elimination (a labor which gave us the satisfaction of being 
engaged in professional duties), we arrived at "Nalini," a name 
that could have significance, poetry, and universality, and yet 
be short and easily remembered. 

^55 



With the attainment of a new name, Rosie entered a new phase 
of life. Under the new name, Rosie and all she had suffered in 
her earlier life were buried from public view. I was the only- 
one who knew her as Rosie and called her so. The rest of the 
world knew her as Nalini. I bestirred myself, began to go out 
and meet people in the town. I attended meetings of various 
groups — at the University, the town hall, and the Club, and 
watched for a chance. When the Albert Mission boys had their 
annual social, I mixed in their affairs through the slender link 
of the clerk in the Union, who had once read with me at the 
old pyol school, and I suggested, "Why not a dance recital 
instead of the usual Shakespeare tragedy?" I held forth on the 
revival of art in India so vehemently that they could not easily 
brush me aside, but had to listen. Heaven knew where I had 
found all this eloquence. I delivered such a lecture on the im- 
portance of our culture and the place of the dance in it that 
they simply had to accept what I said. Someone doubted if a 
classical dance would be suitable for a student assembly. I 
proved that the classical dance could be viewed as the lightest 
of entertainments, considering its versatility. I was a man with 
a mission. I dressed myself soberly for the part in a sort of 
rough-spun silk shirt and an upper cloth and a handspun and 
handwoven dhoti, and I wore rimless glasses — a present from 
Marco at one of our first meetings. I wore a wrist-watch — all 
this in my view lent such weight to what I said that they had 
to listen to me respectfully. I too felt changed; I had ceased 
to be the old Railway Raju and I earnestly wished that I too 
could bury myself, as Rosie had done, under a new name. 
Fortunately it didn't make much difference. No one seemed 
to bother about my affairs as those in the immediate railway 
colony did, and even if they knew they seemed to have other 
things to remember than my career and its ups and downs. I 
never knew I could speak so fluently on cultural matters. I 
had picked up a little terminology from Rosie and put it to the 
ij6 



best use. I described "The Dancing Feet" and explained its 
significance word by word and almost performed the dance 
act myself. They watched me in open-mouthed wonder. I 
threw a further bait to the committee: if they liked, they could 
go with me and see a sample of the show. They enthusiastically 
agreed. I mentioned her as a cousin who was on a visit, and 
who was famous in her own place. 

The next morning Rosie had tidied up the hall so that it did 
not look too bad. She had decorated the place with flowers 
from a gold mohur tree. She had stuck the bunch in a bronze 
tumbler, and kept it in a corner; it touched up our little home 
with some sort of beauty. She had also pushed away our rolls 
of bedding and other boxes, stools, and odds and ends to the 
farthest corner, thrown a dhoti over the heap, and covered it 
again cunningly with a striped carpet pulled from under a bed. 
This gave it a mysterious look. She had shaken the old mat and 
rolled it up so that the tattered portions were invisible. She 
managed to have ready cups of brown, steaming coffee. All this 
was an excellent preparation, calculated to win a public for 
her. The men, two of them, came and knocked on the door. 
When I opened it there they stood. Rosie had hung a printed 
sheet over the kitchen doorway and was behind it. I opened 
the door, saw the men there, and said, "Oh, you have come!" 
as if I had thought they wouldn't. Somehow I felt it would be 
good to give it all a casual air. They smirked foolishly, realizing 
they had come on an agreeable errand to watch a possible 
beauty. 

I seated them on the mat, spoke to them of world politics 
for a moment, and said, "You can spare a little time, I suppose? 
I'll ask my cousin if she is free." 

I walked through the kitchen curtain and she was standing 
there. I grinned at her and winked at her. She stood stock still 
and grinned back at me. We were enjoying this piece of stage- 
management; we felt we had already begun to put on a show. 
She had tied her hair into a knot, decorated her forehead with 

157 



a small vermilion dot, lightly sprinkled a little powder on her 
face, and clad herself in a blue cotton sari — ^an effect of sim- 
plicity produced with a lot of preparation. After five minutes 
of silent waiting, I nodded, and she followed me out. 

The Secretary and the Treasurer gaped. I said, "These are 
my friends. Sit down." She smiled, and seated herself on a 
small mat — modestly away. I knew at that moment that her 
smile was an "open sesame" to her future. There was an awk- 
ward pause for a moment and then I said, "These are my 
friends. They are having a variety show in the College Union, 
and were wondering if you would do anything for them." 

She asked, "Variety? What other items are you having?" 
and puckered her brow in a superior way. 

They said apologetically, "A few fancy-dress items, mim- 
icry and such things." 

She said, "How can you fit my program into that? How 
much time do you want to give me?" She was taking charge 
of their program. 

They said, greatly flustered, "One hour, an hour and a half — 
anything you like." 

Now she delivered them a homily. "You see, a dance pro- 
gram is not like variety, it needs time to be built up. It's some- 
thing that has to develop even as one is performing and one is 
watching." 

They agreed with her sentiments absolutely. I interrupted to 
say, "Their main idea in coming now is to see you, and to see 
whatever bit of your art you can show them. Would you 
oblige us?" 

She made a wry face and grumbled, looked hesitant, and 
gave us no reply. 

"What is it? They are waiting for a reply from you. They 
are busy men." 

"Oh, no. No need to hustle the lady. We can wait." 

"How, how to — manage now — no accompaniments — with- 
out accompaniments I never like — " she was saying, and I said, 

158 



"Oh, this is not a full-dress show. Just a little — When there 
is a full-dress show we shall have accompaniments. After all, 
you are the most important item." I cajoled her and the other 
two happily joined me; and Rosie agreed hesitantly, saying, "If 
you are so keen, I can't refuse. But don't blame me if it is not 
good." She went behind the curtain once again, returned bear- 
ing coffee on a plate, and set it down. 

Out of formal politeness the gentlemen said, "Why bother 
about coffee?" I pressed them to accept it. 

As they sipped their coffee, Rosie began her dance, to the 
accompaniment of a song that she lightly sang. I ventured to 
beat time with my hands, like a very knowing one. They 
watched in fascination. She suddenly paused, wiped the per- 
spiration from her brow, took a deep breath, and, before 
resuming again, said to me, "Don't beat time; it misleads me." 

"All right," I said, awkwardly grinning, trying not to look 
snubbed. I whispered, "Oh, she is so precise, you know." They 
shook their heads. 

She finished her piece and asked, "Shall I go on? Shall I do 
The Dancing Feet'?" 

"Yes, yes," I cried, glad to be consulted. "Go on. They will 
Hke it." 

When they recovered from the enchantment, one of them 
said, "I must admit I have never cared for Bharat Natyam, but 
watching this lady is an education. I now know why people 
are in raptures over it." 

The other said, "My only fear is that she may be too good 
for our function. But it doesn't matter. I'll reduce the other 
items to give her all the time she wants." 

"We must make it our mission to educate the public taste," 
I said. "We must not estimate the public taste and play down 
to it. We must try to raise it by giving only the best." 

"I think up to the interval we shall have the variety and all 
such tomfoolery. After the interval this lady can take up the 
entire show." 

159 



I looked up at her for a second as if waiting for her approval, 
and said, "She'll, of course, be pleased to help you. But you 
must provide the drummer and accompanists," and thus ac- 
quired at last the accompanists Rosie had been clamoring for 
all along. 



1 60 



Chapter Nine 



^^«$kS^xS>^xSx$^x$x$x$^x$x$x$x$kSx$>. 



My activities suddenly multiplied. The Union function was the 
start. Rocket-like, she soared. Her name became public prop- 
erty. It was not necessary for me to elaborate or introduce her 
to the public now. The very idea would be laughed at. I be- 
came known because I went about with her, not the other 
way round. She became known because she had the genius in 
her, and the public had to take notice of it. I am able to speak 
soberly about it now — only now. At that time I was puffed 
up with the thought of how I had made her. I am now disposed 
to think that even Marco could not have suppressed her per- 
manently; sometime she was bound to break out and make her 
way. Don't be misled by my present show of humility; at the 
time there was no limit to my self-congratulation. When I 
watched her in a large hall with a thousand eyes focused on 
her, I had no doubt that people were telling themselves and 
each other, "There he is, the man but for whom — " And I 
imagined all this adulation lapping around my ears like wave- 
lets. In every show I took, as a matter of right, the middle 
sofa in the first row. I gave it out that that was my seat wher- 
ever I might go, and unless I sat there Nalini would be unable 
to perform. She needed my inspiring presence. I shook my 
head discreetly; sometimes I lightly tapped my fingers together 
in timing. When I met her eyes, I smiled familiarly at her on 
the stage. Sometimes I signaled her a message with my eyes 
and fingers, suggesting a modification or a criticism of her 

i6i 



performance. I liked the way the president of the occasion sat 
next to me, and leaned over to say something to me. They all 
liked to be seen talking to me. They felt almost as gratified as 
if they spoke to Nalini herself. I shook my head, laughed with 
restraint, and said something in reply; leaving the watching 
audience at our back to guess the import of our exchanges, 
although actually it was never anything more than, "The hall 
seems to have filled." 

I threw a glance back to the farthest corner of the hall, as 
if to judge the crowd, and said, "Yes, it's full," and swiftly 
turned round, since dignity required that I look ahead. No 
show started until I nodded to the man peeping from the wings, 
and then the curtain went up. I never gave the signal until I 
satisfied myself that everything was set. I inquired about the 
lighting, microphone arrangements, and looked about as if I 
were calculating the velocity of the air, the strength of the 
ceiling, and as if I wondered if the pillars would support the 
roof under the circumstances. By all this I created a tenseness 
which helped Nalini's career. When they satisfied all the con- 
ditions a performance began, the organizers felt they had 
achieved a diflicult object. Of course, they paid for the dance, 
and the public was there, after paying for their seats, but all 
the same I gave the inescapable impression that I was con- 
ferring on them a favor by permitting the dance. I was a strict 
man. When I thought that the program had gone on long 
enough I looked at the watch on my wrist and gave a slight 
nod of the head, and Nalini would understand that she must 
end the show with the next item. If anyone made further 
suggestions, I simply laughed them off. Sometimes slips of 
paper traveled down from the back of the hall, with requests 
for this item or that, but I frowned so much when a slip was 
brought near me that people became nervous to pass on such 
things. They generally apologized. "I don't know. Someone 
from the back bench — it just came to me — " I took it with a 
frown, read it with bored tolerance, and pushed it away over 
162 



the arm of the sofa; it fell on the carpet, into oblivion. I made 
it look as if such tricks should be addressed to lesser beings 
and that they would not work here. 

One minute before the curtain came down, I looked for the 
Secretary and nodded to him to come over. I asked him, "Is 
the car ready? Please have it at the other door, away from the 
crowd. I'd like to take her out quietly." It was a false statement. 
I really liked to parade her through the gaping crowds. After 
the show, there were still people hanging around to catch a 
glimpse of the star. I walked ahead of her or beside her without 
much concern. At the end of the performance they presented 
her with a large garland of flowers, and they gave me one too. 
I accepted mine with protest. "There is really no reason why 
you should waste money on a garland for me," I said; I slung 
it carelessly on my arm or in the thick of the crowd dramat- 
ically handed it over to Nalini with "Well, you really deserve 
two," and made her carry it for me. 

It was a world of showmanship till we reached the privacy 
of our house, when she would throw off the restraint and 
formality of hours and give me a passionate hug with "Even 
if I have seven rebirths I won't be able to repay my debt to 
you." I swelled with pride when I heard her, and accepted it 
all as my literal due. Methodically she started wrapping the 
flowers in a wet towel so that they might remain fresh in the 
morning. 

On program days she cooked our supper in the afternoon. 
We could easily have afforded to engage a cook, but she al- 
ways said, "After all, for two people, we don't need a cook 
moping around the house. I must not lose touch with my 
womanly duties." She spoke of the evening show all through 
dinner, criticizing some arrangement or the background ac- 
companiment, how so and so just failed to catch up. She lived 
entirely in the memory of her evening show. Sometimes after 
food she demonstrated a piece. And then she picked up a book 
and read on till we went to bed. 

163 



In a few months I had to move out of my old house. The 
Salt managed to score a point of law and secured an attach- 
ment of the property before judgment. My lawyer came to 
me and said, "Don't worry about it; it only means he will have 
to pay the house tax, with arrears, if any. Of course, your 
mother's signature may be required too, but I'll get it. It is just 
like mortgaging the house to him. You may have to give him 
rent — a nominal one if you stay here.'* 

"Paying rent for my own house!" I said. "If I have to pay 
rent I prefer a better house." For our growing stature the 
house was inadequate. No visitor could be entertained. No 
privacy. No place for any furniture. My father had designed 
this house for a shopkeeper, not for a man of consequence and 
status who had charge of a growing celebrity. "Moreover, 
where is the place for you to practice in?" I asked Nalini when 
she demurred at the notion of moving out. Somehow she was 
deeply attached to the house, the place which first gave her 
asylum. 

The lawyer went to the village and returned with my 
mother's signature on the document. "How did she take it?" 
I could not help asking. 

"Not badly, not badly," said the adjournment expert. "Well, 
of course, we cannot expect elderly people to take the same 
view as we do. I had to argue and persuade her, though your 
uncle proved a difficult man." 

Four days later my mother's letter came; she had written on 
a yellow paper with a pencil: "... I gave my signature not 
because I was happy about it but because otherwise the lawyer 
would not go from here, and your uncle would not let him 
stay in peace. It is all confusing to me. I'm sick of everything. 
I signed without your uncle's knowledge, when he was away 
in the garden, so that the lawyer might leave this place with- 
out any damage to his person. Anyway, what does it all mean? 
Your lawyer mentioned that you are looking for a new house 
for that woman. If it is so, I'll come back to live in my old 
164 



t 



house. After all, I wish to spend the rest of my days in my 
own house." It was good of my mother to have set aside her 
own anger and written to me. I felt touched by her solicitude. 
I was troubled by her desire to come back. I could understand 
it, but I resisted the idea. It seemed best to let the Sait take the 
home and be done with it once for all. Who wanted this ram- 
shackle house anyway? To have Mother live in the house, I 
should have to pay a rent to the Sait. Who would look after 
her? I was so busy. I rationalized in all possible ways and put 
away her letter without a reply. I moved to another house and 
became very busy, and in all the rush quietened my conscience. 
I felt sorry, but I rationalized: "After all her brother is dear 
to her, and he will look after her. Why should she come here 
and live all alone?" 

The sty Hsh house at New Extension was more in keeping with 
our status. It was two-storied, with a large compound, lawns, 
garden, and garage. On the upper floor we had our bedrooms 
and a large hall where Nalini practiced her dances. It was 
carpeted with a thick deep blue spun-silk carpet at one end, 
leaving a space of marble tiles for her to dance on. I had 
managed to fix up a pedestal and a bronze image of dancing 
Nataraja in one corner. It was her oflice. I had now a per- 
manent group of musicians — five of them, a flautist, a drummer, 
etc. She had a "dance-master" whom I discovered in Koppal, 
a man who had steeped himself in the traditional dance for 
half a century and lived in his village home. I ferreted him 
out and brought him over to Malgudi and gave him an out- 
house in our compound to live in. All kinds of people were 
always passing in and out of our house. I had a large staff of 
servants — a driver for our car, two gardeners for the garden, 
a Gurkha sentry at the gate with a dagger at his waist, and 
two cooks because our entertainments were beginning to grow. 
As I have said, a miscellaneous population was always passing 
in and out of the compound: musicians, their friends, those 

165 



that came to see me by appointment; the servants, their friends, 
and so on. On the ground floor I had an office with a sec- 
retary-in-waiting, a young graduate from the local college, 
who dealt with my correspondence. 

I had three or four grades of visitors. Some I received on 
the veranda; these were musicians or aspiring musicians who 
wanted a chance to accompany Nalini. I was offhand with 
them. About ten such asked for an interview with me every 
day. They were always waiting on the outer veranda to have 
a chance to speak to me. I went in and out, hardly noticing 
them. They respectfully rose at the sight of me and saluted, 
and if they intercepted me I kept up a show of giving them a 
hearing, and then said, "Leave your address with my clerk 
there. If there is anything that can be done, I'll ask him to call 
you up." When they flourished a batch of testimonials I 
snatched a brief look at them and said, "Good, good. But there 
is nothing I can do now. Leave your name in the office" — and 
I passed on. My outer veranda was cluttered with benches on 
which people sat and waited all day to have a chance to speak 
to me. I treated them with the scantiest attention. I left them 
to guess when I would come to my table. Sometimes obscure 
composers turned up with new songs especially created for 
Nalini's benefit. Sometimes when I sat at the office table I 
did not mind if they peeped in and took their chance to speak 
to me. I never offered this class of visitor a chair, but did not 
mind if he pulled one up and sat down. When I wanted to 
dispose of him, I pushed my chair back and went in abruptly, 
leaving it to my secretary to see him off. Sometimes I observed 
how big a crowd waited for me outside, through the glass 
window in the hall, and I made a strategic exit through a side 
door, straight on to the garage, and from there dashed to the 
gate, while the visitors looked on helplessly. I felt vastly su- 
perior to everyone. 

Apart from those that came as supplicants, there were others 
who approached me with genuine offers of engagement. They 
1 66 



were the higher grade of visitors. I received them on the hall 
sofa and rang the bell for coflFee. I offered my inner circle of 
visitors coffee day and night. Our coffee bill alone amounted 
to three hundred a month, enough to maintain a middle-class 
family in comfort. The appointments in the hall were all ex- 
pensive — brass inlaid trays, ivory knickknacks, group photo- 
graphs with Nalini in the middle. Sitting in that hall and look- 
ing round, I had the satisfaction of feeling that I had arrived. 

Where was Nalini in all this? Away out of sight. She spent 
a great part of the day in her rehearsal hall with her musicians. 
One could hear the stamping of feet and the jingle of anklets 
on the upper floor. After all, she was living the life she had 
visualized. Visitors had always a hope that they might get a 
glimpse of her passing in or out of the house. I knew what they 
were looking for, with their shifty looks darting at the inner 
doorway. But I took care to see that no one saw her. I had a 
monopoly of her and nobody had anything to do with her. 
If anyone ventured to ask for her I said, "She is busy," or "No 
need to trouble her. You have told me; that is enough." I re- 
sented anyone's wanting to make a direct approach to her. She 
was my property. This idea was beginning to take root in my 
mind. 

There were, however, a few friends of the inner circle whom 
I took upstairs to her room. It was a very eclectic group. They 
had to be my intimates; I had had no friends at all formerly; 
my friendship was now sought after by others. I was on back- 
slapping terms with two judges, four eminent politicians of the 
district whose ward could bring ten thousand votes at any 
moment for any cause, and two big textile-mill owners, a 
banker, a municipal councilor, and the editor of The Truth, 
2. weekly, in which an appreciation of Nalini appeared from 
time to time. These men could come into my hall without 
appointment, demand coffee, and ask loudly, "Where is Nalini? 
Upstairs? Well, I think I'll see her for a moment and go." They 
could go up, talk to her, order coffee, and stay on as long as 

167 



they pleased. They addressed me as "Raj," familiarly. I liked 
to hobnob with them because they were men of money or 
influence. 

Apart from them, sometimes musicians or actors or other 
dancers called on Nalini and spent hours and hours with her. 
Nalini enjoyed their company immensely, and I often saw 
them in her hall, some lying on carpets, some sitting up, all 
talking and laughing, while coffee and food were being carried 
to them. I occasionally went up and chatted with them — always 
with a feeling that I was an interloper in that artistic group. 
Sometimes it irritated me to see them all so happy and aban- 
doned. I signaled to Nalini to come over to the bedroom, as if 
for a big, important aside, and when she closed the door I 
whispered, "How long are they going to stay.^" 

"Why?" 

"They have been here the whole day and may go on till 
night—" 

"Well, I like their company. It's good of them to visit us." 

"Oh, as if we had no one else to visit us." 

"It's all right. How can I tell them to go? And it makes me 
happy to be with them." 

"Surely; I'm not denying it. But remember, you have to rest 
and we have a train journey ahead. You will have to pack up, 
and also practice. Remember you have promised new items for 
the Trichy show." 

"That's easy to manage!" she said, turning round and going 
back to her friends, shutting the door on me. I silently fretted. 
I liked her to be happy — but only in my company. This 
group of miscellaneous art folk I didn't quite approve. They 
talked too much shop and Nalini was likely to tell them all our 
business secrets. She never missed a chance to get a gathering 
of such friends, wherever she might be. She said, "They are 
people with the blessing of Goddess Saraswathi on them, and 
they are good people. I like to talk to them." 

"You don't know the world — they'D be a jealous lot. Don't 
1 68 



you know that real artists never come together? These people 
come to you because they are your inferiors." 

"I'm tired of all talk of superior and inferior. What is so 
superior about us?" she asked in real indignation. 

"Well, you know, you have more engagements than a hun- 
dred of them put together," I said. 

"That's more money," she said. "I don't care much for that 
sort of superiority." 

Gradually arguments began to crop up between us, and that, 
I said, put the final husband-wife touch on our relationship. 
Her circle was widening. Artists of the first and second rank, 
music teachers, dilettantes of the town, schoolgirls who wanted 
ideas for their school functions, all kinds of people asked to 
see her. Wherever possible I turned them back, but if they 
managed to slip through and get upstairs, I could do nothing 
about it. Nalini kept them for hours and would hardly let 
them go back. 

We had calls from hundreds of miles away. Our trunks were 
always packed and ready. Sometimes when we left iMalgudi we 
did not return home for nearly a fortnight. Our engagements 
took us to all corners of South India, with Cape Comorin at 
one end and the border of Bombay at the other, and from 
coast to coast. I kept a map and a calendar and tried to plan 
out our engagements, I studied the invitations and suggested 
alternative dates, so that a single journey might combine sev- 
eral engagements. Arranging an itinerar^^ for each period took 
up a lot of my energy. We were out of town for about twenty 
days in the month, and during the ten days we were in Malgudi 
we had one or two dates nearer home, and whatever was left 
over could be counted as rest. It was a strenuous program, 
and, wherever I might be, my secretary kept me informed of 
the mail arriving each day and received instructions by phone. 
I was committed three months ahead. I had a large calendar on 
which I marked in red the dates of engagements, and hung it 

169 



up at first in her rehearsal hall, but she protested, "It's ugly. 
Take it away!" 

"I want you to keep an idea before you of where you are 
going next." 

"Not necessary," she cried. "What am I going to do, looking 
at those dates?" She rolled it up and put it in my hand. "Don't 
show it to me. It only frightens me to see so many engage- 
ments," she said. When I told her to get ready for the train, 
she got ready; when I asked her to come down, she came down; 
she got in and out of trains at my bidding. I don't know if she 
ever noticed what town we were in or what sabha or under 
whose auspices a show was being held. It was all the same, I 
think, whether it was Madras City or Madura, or a remote hill 
town like Ootacamund. Where there was no railway, a car 
came to fetch us from the railhead. Someone met us at the 
platform, led us to a limousine waiting outside, and drove us 
to a hotel or a bungalow. Our circus of accompanying mu- 
sicians was taken away in a bunch and berthed comfortably 
somewhere. I kept this lot in good humor by fussing about 
their comfort. "They are our accompanists. I hope you have 
made proper arrangements for them too." 

"Yes, yes, sir. We've reserved two large rooms for them.** 

"You must send them a car later to bring them over to our 
place." I always made it a point to collect them and keep them 
handy two hours ahead of a show. They were a timeless lot, 
those instrumental players; they slept, or went shopping, or sat 
around playing cards — never looking at a clock. Handling them 
was an art — they had to be kept in good humor; otherwise they 
could ruin a whole evening and blame it on mood or fate. I 
paid them well. I kept up a show of looking after them, but I 
kept aloof. I was careful to see that they assumed no familiarity 
with Nalini. 

If the show was at six, I generally insisted upon Nalini's 
resting until four o'clock in the afternoon. If we were guests 
in a house, she generally liked to sit around with the women- 
170 



folk and chat endlessly with them. But I went up to her and 
said with a good deal of firm kindness, "I think you had better 
rest a while; the train journey last night was not very com- 
fortable," and she finished the sentence she was uttering or 
hearing and came up to our guest room. 

She felt annoyed at my interference. "Why should you come 
and pull me out of company? Am I a baby?" I expostulated 
with her that it was for her own good that I did so. I knew it 
was only a partial truth. If I examined my heart I knew I had 
pulled her out because I did not like to see her enjoy other 
people's company. I liked to keep her in a citadel. 

If there was a train to catch after the show, I managed to 
have a car waiting ready to take us to the station. I had food 
brought to us on the train in silver or stainless-steel vessels, 
and we had our supper in the privacy of our compartment. 
But it was a brief, short-lived relief, as it soon began all over 
again, getting down at another station, going through another 
performance, and off again. When we visited places of im- 
portance, she sometimes asked to be taken to see a famous 
temple or a shop or some local sight. I always replied, "Yes, 
yes. Let us see if we can fit it in," but it was never done, as 
I always had to catch another train so as to fulfill another 
engagement. We were going through a set of mechanical ac- 
tions day in and day out — the same receptions at the station, 
fussy organizers, encounters, and warnings, the same middle 
sofa in the first row, speeches and remarks and smiles, polite 
conversation, garlands and flash photos, congratulations, and 
off to catch the train — pocketing the most important thing, 
the check. Gradually I began to say, not "I am going to Trichy 
for a performance by Nalini," but "I am performing at Trichy 
on Sunday, on Monday I have a program . . ." and then, "I 
can dance in your place only on ..." I demanded the highest 
fee, and got it, of anyone in India. I treated those that came to 
ask for a show as supplicants, I had an enormous monthly 
income, I spent an enormous amount on servants and style, 

171 



and I paid an enormous amount of income tax. Yet I found 
Nalini accepting it all with a touch of resignation rather than 
bouncing contentment. She had seemed such a happy creature 
in our old house, even when my uncle was bullying her. 

Nalini cherished every gariand that she got at the end of a 
performance. Usually she cut it up, sprinkled water on it, and 
preserved it carefully, even when we were in a train. She said, 
holding up a piece of garland and sniffing the air for its 
fragrance, "To me this is the only wonh-while part of our 
whole activity." 

We were in a train when she said it. I asked her, "What 
makes you say so?" 

"I love jasmine." 

"Not the check that comes with it?" 

"What is one to do with so much? All day long and all 
through the week you are collecting checks, and more and 
more often. But when is the time coming when wc can enjoy 
the use of those checks?" 

"Well, you have a big household, a big car and what not — 
is that not enjoyment of life?" 

"I don't know," she said, remaining moody. "How I wish 
I could go into a crowd, walk about, take a seat in the audi- 
torium, and start out for an evening without having to make 
up or dress for the stage!" 

Some dangerous weariness seemed to be coming over her. 
I thought it best not to prod too much. Perhaps she wanted 
fewer engagements, but that was not possible. I asked, "You 
are not saying that your legs are aching, are you?" 

It had the desired effect. It pricked her pride and she said, 
"Certainly not. I can dance for several hours at each show. 
Only you want me to stop." 

"Yes, yes; true," I cried. "Otherwise you would be fatiguing 
yourself." 

"Not only that; you also want to catch the train — though 

17* 



what will be lost if we catch the next day's, I don't know — '* 
I didn't allow her to finish her sentence. I called her flatter- 
ingly a shrewd girl, laughed and enjoyed it as a joke, fondled 
her, and made her forget the subject. I thought it was a 
dangerous line of thought. It seemed absurd that we should 
earn less than the maximum we could manage. My philosophy 
was that while it lasted the maximum money had to be squeezed 
out. We needed all the money in the world. If I were less 
prosperous, who would care for me? Where would be the 
smiles which greeted me now wherever I turned, and the re- 
spectful agreement shown to my remarks when I said some- 
thing to the man in the next chair? It filled me with dread that 
I should be expected to do with less. "If we don't work and 
earn when the time is good, we commit a sin. When we have 
a bad time no one will help us." I was planning big investments 
as soon as possible — as soon as we could count on a little more 
margin. As it was, the style of living and entertaining which 
I had evolved was eating up all our resources. 

Sometimes she said, "Spending two thousand a month on 
just two of us. Is there no way of living more simply?" 

"Leave that to me; we spend two thousand because we have 
to. We have to maintain our status." After a good deal of 
thought, I ran the bank account in her name. I didn't want my 
creditors to get at me again. My adjournment lawyer was 
proceeding at his own pace, sometimes coming to me for a 
signature or funds, and managing things without bothering me. 
Nalini signed any check I asked her to sign. One thing I must 
add: whenever I was in town I gathered a big circle of friends 
and we played cards practically twenty-four hours at a stretch. 
I had set apart a room for the purpose and I had two personal 
servants serving tea and coffee and even food on the spot; and 
we had surreptitious drinks too, although there was prohibition 
in force — well, the prohibition law was not for a man of my 
influence. I had managed to get a medical certificate to say 
that I needed alcohol for my welfare. Although I myself cared 

173 



very little for drink, I hugged a glass of whisky for hours. 
"Permit-holder" became a social title in our land and attracted 
men of importance around me, because the permit was a dif- 
ficult thing to acquire. I showed respect for law by keeping 
the street window shut when serving drink to non-permit folk. 
All kinds of men called me "Raj" and slapped my back. We 
played Three-Cards sometimes for two days at a stretch; I 
changed a two-thousand-rupee check for the purpose, and 
expected those who came there to meet me on equal terms. 
Through my intimacy with all sorts of people, I knew what 
was going on behind the scenes in the government, at the 
market, at Delhi, on the racecourse, and who was going to be 
who in the coming week. I could get a train reservation at a 
moment's notice, relieve a man summoned to jury work, re- 
instate a dismissed official, get a vote for a cooperative election, 
nominate a committee man, get a man employed, get a boy 
admitted to a school, and get an unpopular official shifted else- 
where, all of which seemed to me important social services, 
an influence worth buying at the current market price. 

In the glow of this radiant existence, I had practically over- 
looked the fact that Marco still existed. We hardly mentioned 
his name. I never took note of the fact that he still inhabited 
the globe, and I took the only precaution needed — I avoided 
any engagement near his house. I didn't want to run the risk 
of facing him again. I had no idea what Nalini had in mind. I 
believed she still felt embittered at the thought of him, and 
would rather not be reminded of him. I supposed that all as- 
sociations with him were dim, fossilized, or had ceased to exist. 
I also thought that under her name Nalini she was safely out 
of range, but I was mistaken. We played for a whole week 
at Malgudi. The post one day brought us a book. Generally I 
received a miscellaneous collection of mail-— catalogues, pro- 
grams, verse, and what not, all of which was seen and disposed 

174 



of by my secretary. Some Tamil and English illustrated journals 
meant for Nalini were sent up. I hardly looked at anything 
except letters offering engagements, and certainly never at 
books and journals. I was a man of many preoccupations, and 
I found it impossible nowadays to sit down with any book and 
had instructed my secretary not to bother me with them. 
But one day he brought a packet, saying, "Would you look 
at this, sir. I thought it might be of special interest." 

He held the book open. I snatched it from him. It was a 
book by Marco, a book full of illustrations and comments. 
"See page 158" said a penciled message. I turned it over, and 
there it was, the heading "Mempi Cave Pictures." At the head 
of the chapter was a brief line to say, "The author is obliged 
to acknowledge his debt to Sri. Raju of Malgudi Railway 
Station for his help." The book was from a firm of publishers 
in Bombay, with their compliments, sent by instructions of 
the author. It was a gorgeous book costing twenty rupees, full 
of art plates, a monograph on The Cultural History of South 
India. It was probably an eminent work on the subject, but 
beyond me. 

I told the secretary, "I'll keep it. It's all right." I turned the 
pages. Why did the boy bring it up as a special matter? Did 
he know who was who? Or — ? I dismissed the idea. It must 
have been because he was rather taken by the blue and gold 
of the binding and the richness of the material. He must have 
feared that if he didn't draw my attention to it, I might prob- 
ably demand an explanation. That was all. So I said, "Thank 
you, ril read it." And then I sat wondering what I should 
do about it. Should I take it upstairs to Nalini or — ? I told 
myself, "Why should she be bothered with this? After all, it 
is a piece of academic work, which has bored her sufficiently." 
I turned it over again, to see if there was any letter enclosed. 
No. It was impersonal, like the electricity bill. I turned to 
page 158 and reread his note. It was thrilling to see my name in 

175 



print. But why did he do it? I lost myself in speculating on his 
motives. Was it just to keep his word because he had promised, 
or could it be to show that he'd not forgotten me so lightly? 
Anyway, I thought it would be best to put the book away. 
I carried it to my most secret, guarded place in the house — the 
liquor chest, adjoining the cardroom, the key of which I car- 
ried next to my heart — stuffed the volume out of sight, and 
locked it up. Nalini never went near it. I did not mention the 
book to her. After all, I told myself, "What has she to do with 
it? The book is sent to me, and the acknowledgment is of my 
services." But it was like hiding a corpse. I've come to the 
conclusion that nothing in this world can be hidden or sup- 
pressed. All such attempts are like holding an umbrella to 
conceal the sun. 

Three days later Marco's photograph appeared in the Il- 
lustrated Weekly of Bombay ^ on the middle page. The //- 
lustrated Weekly was one of the papers Nalini always read — 
it was full of wedding pictures, stories, and essays she enjoyed. 
The photograph was published along with a review of his book, 
which was called "An epoch-making discovery in Indian 
cultural history." I was looking through my accounts in the 
hall, free from all visitors. I heard footsteps clattering down 
in a great run. I turned and saw her coming with the magazine 
in her hand, all excitement. She thrust the page before me and 
asked, "Did you see that?" 

I showed appropriate surprise and told her, "Calm yourself. 
Sit down." 

"This is really great. He worked for it all his life. I wonder 
what the book is like!" 

"Oh, it's academic. We won't understand it. For those who 
care for such things, it must seem interesting." 

"I want so much to see the book! Can't we get it some- 
where?" She suddenly called my secretary, an unprecedented 
act on her part. "Mani," she said and held the picture up to 
him, "you must get me this book." 

176 



He came nearer, read the passage, brooded for a moment, 
looked at me, and said, "All right, madam." 

I hurriedly told him, "Hurry up with that letter, and go in 
person to the post office and remember to add a late fee." He 
was gone. She still sat there. Unless she was called to meet 
visitors, she never came downstairs. What was this agitation 
that made her do these unusual thinirs? I wondered for a mo- 
ment whether I ought not to bring the book out to her. But 
she would ask me for so many explanations. I simply suppressed 
the whole thing. She returned upstairs to her room. I noticed 
later that she had cut out the photo of her husband and placed 
it on her dressing mirror. I was rather shocked. I wanted to 
treat it as a joke, but could not find the right words, and so 
left it alone. 1 only averted my eyes when I passed the dressing 
mirror. 

It was a long week in town; otherwise we should have been 
fully occupied in moving about, and probably would have 
missed that particular issue of the Illustrated Weekly. On the 
third day, while we were in bed, the very first question she 
asked me was, "Where have you kept the book?" 

"Who told you about it?" 

"W1iy bother? I know it has come to you. I want to sec it." 

"All right, rU show it to you tomorrow." Evidently Alani 
must be responsible. I had made it a convention in our establish- 
ment that my secretary should have no direct access to her, 
but the system was breaking down. I decided to punish him 
properly for his lapse. 

She sat reclining on her pillow with a journal in her hand, 
to all appearances reading, but actually preparing herself for 
a fight. She pretended to read for a moment and suddenly 
asked, "Why did you want to hide it from me?" 

I was not ready for this, and so I said, "Can't we discuss it 
all tomorrow? Now I'm too sleepy." 

She was out for a fight. She said, "You can tell me in a 
word why you did it and go to sleep immediately." 

177 



"I didn't know it would interest you." 

"Why not? After all—" 

"You have told me that you never thought his work inter- 
esting." 

"Even now I'll probably be bored. But anything happening 
to him is bound to interest me. I'm pleased he has made a 
name now, although I don't know what it is all about." 

"You suddenly fancy yourself interested in him, that's all. 
But the book came to me, not to you, remember." 

"Is that sufficient reason why it should be hidden from me?" 

"I can do what I please with my own book, I suppose? That's 
all. I'm going to sleep. If you are not reading, but are merely 
going to think, you can as well do it in the dark, and put out 
the light." 

I don't know why I spoke so recklessly. The light was put 
out, but I found that she was sitting up — and crying in the 
dark. I wondered for a second whether I should apologize 
and comfort her. But I decided otherwise. She had been bot- 
tling up a lot of gloom lately, it seemed to me. It would do 
her good to have it all out without my interference. I turned 
over and pretended to sleep. Half an hour passed. I switched 
on the light, and there she was, quietly crying still. 

"What has come over you?" 

"After all, after all, he is my husband." 

"Very well. Nothing has happened to make you cry. You 
should feel pleased with his reputation." 

"I am," she said. 

"Then stop crying and go to sleep." 

"Why does it irritate you when I speak of him?" 

I realized it was no use trying to sleep. I might as well meet 
the challenge. I replied, "Do you ask why? Don't you remem- 
ber when and how he left you?" 

"I do, and I deserved nothing less. Any other husband would 
have throttled me then and there. He tolerated my company 
for nearly a month, even after knowing what I had done." 

178 



"You talk about a single incident in two different ways. I 
don't know which one I should take." 

"I don't know. I may be mistaken in my own judgment of 
him. After all, he had been kind to me." 

"He wouldn't even touch you." 

"Should you taunt me with that?" she asked with sudden 
submissiveness. I couldn't understand her. I had an appalling 
thought that for months and months I had eaten, slept, and lived 
with her without in the least understanding her mind. What 
were her moods? Was she sane or insane? Was she a liar? Did 
she bring all these charges against her husband at our first 
meeting just to seduce me? Would she be leveling various 
charges against me now that she seemed to be tiring of me — 
even to the extent of saying that I was a moron and an im- 
becile? I felt bewildered and unhappy. I didn't understand her 
sudden affection for her husband. What was this sudden mood 
that was coming over her? I did my best for her. Her career 
was at its height. What was it that still troubled her? Could 
I get at it and find a remedy? I had been taking too much for 
granted in our hectic professional existence. 

"We must go on a holiday somewhere," I said. 

"Where?" she asked in a businesslike manner. 

I was taken aback. "Where? Anywhere! Somewhere." 

"We are always going somewhere. What difference is it 
going to make?" 

"We'll go and enjoy ourselves, on our own, without any 
engagement." 

"I don't think it's going to be possible until I fall sick or 
break my thighbone," she said and giggled viciously. "Do you 
know the bulls yoked to an oil-crusher — they keep going round 
and round and round, in a circle, without a beginning or an 
end?" 

I sat up and told her, "We'll go as soon as the present ac- 
ceptances are finished." 

"In three months?" 

179 



"Yes. After they are finished we'll pause for a little breath." 
She looked so unconvinced of this that I said, "Well, if you 
don't like an engagement, you can always say no." 

"To whom?" 

"Why, of course, to me." 

"Yes, if you would tell me before you accept and take an 
advance." 

There was something seriously wrong with her. I went over 
to her bed, sat on it, shook her by the shoulder a little just to 
make it look personal, and asked, "What is the matter with 
you? Are you not happy?" 

"No. I'm not happy. What will you do about it?'* 

I threw up my arms. I really could not say anything. "Well, 
if you tell me what is wrong, I can help. As far as I can see, 
there is nothing for you to be sorry about — you are famous, 
you have made money, you do what you like. You wanted to 
dance; you have done it." 

"Till the thought of it makes me sick," she added. "I feel 
like one of those parrots in a cage taken around village fairs, 
or a performing monkey, as he used to say — " 

I laughed. I thought the best solvent would be laughter rather 
than words. Words have a knack of breeding more words, 
whereas laughter, a deafening, roaring laughter, has a knack 
of swallowing everything up. I worked myself into a paroxysm 
of laughter. She could not remain morose very long in the 
face of it. Presently she caught the contagion, a smirk developed 
into a chuckle, and before she knew what was what her body 
rocked with laughter, all her gloom and misgivings exploded 
in laughter. We went to sleep in a happy frame of mind. The 
time was two hours past midnight. 

Our life fell into a routine after this little disturbance. After 
a break of only three days, during which time I steeped myself 
in the card game, avoiding all discussions with her, our en- 
counters were casual and slight. She was passing through a 
period of moodiness, and it was safest to keep out of her way 
1 80 



and not to rouse her further. The engagements for the next 
three months were all-important, running, as they did, into 
the season of music and dance in South India, for which I had 
taken heavy advance payments. We had ahead of us a travel 
program of nearly two thousand miles, from Malgudi back 
to Malgudi, and if we went through with it there was ample 
time for her to get over the mood, and then I could push her 
into another quarter-year of activity. I had no intention of 
slackening this program. It seemed so unnecessary, so suicidal. 
My only technique was to keep her in good humor to the 
best of my ability from quarter to quarter. 

We were getting through our engagements uneventfully. We 
were back in Malgudi. Mani was away for a couple of days, 
and I was attending personally to an accumulation of cor- 
respondence on my table. Offers of engagements I piled up on 
one side. I had some misgivings about accepting any of them 
right away as I normally would. I felt I should do well to speak 
to her before replying. Of course she'd have to accept them, 
but I wanted to give her a feeling of being consulted. I sorted 
them out. 

Suddenly I came upon a letter addressed to "Rosie, alias 
Nalini." It had bn it the address of a lawyer's firm in Madras. 
I wondered what to do with it for a while. She was upstairs, 
probably reading one of her inexhaustible journals. I felt 
nervous about opening the letter. I had half an impulse to take 
it to her — a sensible part of me said, "It must, after all, be 
her business. She is an adult, with her own affairs. Let her 
tackle it, whatever it may be." But this was only fleeting 
wisdom. The letter had arrived by registered post some days 
ago and Mani had received it and kept it on the table. It had 
a big seal on its flap. I looked at it with misgiving for a while, 
told myself that I was not to be frightened by a seal, and just 
cut it open. I knew she would not mind my seeing her letters. 
The letter came from a lawyer and said, "Madam, under in- 
struction from our client, we are enclosing an application for 

i8i 



your signature, for the release of a box of jewelry left in safe 

custody at the Bank of , in the marked place. After this 

is received we shall proceed to obtain the other signature as 
well, since you are aware that the deposit is in your joint 
names, and obtain the release of the said box, and arrange to 
forward it to you under insurace cover in due course." 

I was delighted. So this was going to bring in more jewelry 
for her? Of course she would be elated. But how big was the 
box? What were the contents worth? These were questions 
that agitated my mind for a while. I looked through the letter 
for some clue; but the lawyer was sparing of words. I took 
the letter and turned to go and give it to her. But on the 
staircase I paused. I returned to my room and sat in my chair, 
thinking. "Well, let me think it over. Where is the hurry?" I 
asked myself. "She has waited for this box so long. Just a 
couple of days more is not going to matter. Anyway, she never 
mentioned it, perhaps she doesn't care." I took the letter to my 
liquor casket and locked it up. A good thing Mani was not 
there. Otherwise he might have created a mess. 

I had some visitors after this. I talked to them and went out 
in the evening to see a few friends. I tried to distract my mind 
in various ways, but the packet bothered me. I returned home 
late. I avoided going upstairs. I heard her jingles upstairs, and 
knew that she was practicing. I returned to my office table 
with the letter from the liquor chest. I opened it carefully 
and read it again. I looked at the enclosed application. It was 
on a printed form; after her signature was going to be Marco's. 
What was the man's purpose in sending it now? Why this sud- 
den generosity to return her an old box? Was he laying a trap 
for her, or what was it? Knowing the man as I did, I concluded 
that it might not be anything more than a correct disposal of 
his affairs, similar to his acknowledgment of my help in his 
book. He was capable of cold, machine-like rectitude; his 
vouchers were in order; he saw probably no sense in being re- 
sponsible for Rosie*s box any more. Rightly, too. The right 
182 



place for Rosie's box was here. But how to release it? If Rosie 
saw this letter she would do God knew what. I had a fear that 
she would not view it calmly, in a businesslike manner. She 
would in all likelihood lose her head completely. She was likely 
to place the wildest interpretation on it and cry out, "See how 
noble he is!" and make herself miserable and spoil for a fight 
with me. There was no knowing what would set off the trigger 
nowadays. His mere photo in the Illustrated Weekly drove her 
crazy — after that book incident I was very careful. I never 
showed her the book at all. 

Next day I waited for her to ask for it, but she never men- 
tioned it again. I thought it'd be safest to leave it there. I was 
very careful. I kept her in good humor and engaged, that was 
all; but I was aware that some sort of awkwardness had devel- 
oped between us, and I kept myself aloof with extreme care. 
I knew that if I allowed more time she would be all right. But 
I felt that to show her this letter would be suicidal. She might 
refuse to do anything except talk about his n^^^bility. Or (who 
could say?) she might insist on taldng the next train to his 
place, throwing up everything. But what was to be done with 
the letter? "Just let it rest in the company of w4iisky bottles 
till it is forgotten," I told myself and laughed grimly. 

During dinner, as usual, we sat side by side and spoke of 
things such as the weather, general politics, the price and con- 
dition of vegetables, and so on. I kept the subject rigorously 
to inconsequential affairs. If we held on for another day, it'd 
be perfect. On the third day we should be on the move again, 
and the bustle and activity of travel would shield us from 
troublesome personal topics. 

After dinner she sat down on the hall sofa to chew betel 
leaves, turned over the pages of a journal on the hall table, and 
then went upstairs. I felt relieved. The swing was coming back 
to normal. I spent a little time in my office, looking into ac- 
counts. The income-tax statement was due to be sent in a couple 
of weeks. I was poring over my very personal account book 

183 



just to see where we stood, and how to prepare our expense 
accounts. After brooding over this mystic matter for a while, 
I went upstairs. I knew I had given her enough time either to 
be steeped in the pages of a book or to sleep. Anything to 
avoid talk. I was becoming uncertain of my own attitude now- 
adays. I feared I might blurt out about the letter. I laid my 
head on the pillow and turned over, with the formula, "I'll 
sleep, I think. Will you switch off when you are done?" She 
grunted some reply. 

How much jewelry might be in the box? Was it his present 
to her or her mother's or what? What a girl! She never gave it 
a thought! Perhaps they were antiquated and she did not care 
for them. If so they might be sold now and converted into 
cash, and no income-tax officer would ever dream of its ex- 
istence. Must be a substantial lot if it had to be kept in safe 
custody. But who could say? Marco was eccentric enough to 
do strange things. He was the sort of fellow to keep even a 
worthless packet at the bank, because that was the right thing 
— to — do — the — r-r-ight thing to — do — I fell asleep. 

Soon after midnight I awoke. She was snoring. An idea 
bothered me. I wanted to see if there was any time limit men- 
tioned. Suppose I kept the letter secret and some serious conse- 
quences arose? I wanted to go down and examine the docu- 
ment at once. But if I got up, she would also wake up and ask 
questions. Or if I took no notice at all of it, what would hap- 
pen? The box would continue to remain in safe custody — or 
the lawyer might write a reminder, which might come in when 
I was out and slip its way through to her, and then questions, 
explanations, scenes. This was proving a greater bother than I 
had at first thought. Nothing that that man did was ever quiet 
or normal. It led to unbelievable complexities. As I kept think- 
ing of it, it magnified itself until I felt that I had dynamite in 
my pocket. I slept fitfully till about five o'clock, and then left 
my bed. I lost no time in going to the liquor casket, pulling out 
the document, and examining it. I carefully read through the 
184 



I 



document, line by line, several times over. The lauj^ers sa d, 
"Per return post," which seemed to my fevered mind an all- 
important instruction. I took it over to the office desk. I found 
a scrap of paper and made a careful trial of Rosie's signature. 
I had her sign so many checks and receipts each day that I was 
very familiar with it. Then I carefully spread out the application 
form and wrote on the indicated line: "Rosie, Nalini." I folded 
it and put it in an addressed cover which the lawyers had en- 
closed, sealed it, and I was the first to appear at the windo^' 
when our extension branch post office opened at seven-thirty 
The postmaster said, "So early! You have come youiself!' 
"My clerk is sick. I was out for a morning walk. Please 
register this." I had walked down for fear that opening the 
garage door might wake her up. 

I had no clear idea as to when or how the jewel box might 
arrive, but I looked for it every day. "Any parcel in the post, 
Mani?" I asked constantly. This almost threatened to become 
a habit. I expected it within the next two days. No signs of it. 
We had to go out of town for four days. Before leaving I in- 
structed Mani, "There may be an insured packet coming. Tell 
the postman to keep it in deposit till we are back on Tuesday. 
They keep such things, don't they?" 

"Yes, sir. But if it is only a registered parcel, I can sign for 
you." 

"No, no. This is an insured parcel and it will have to be 
signed for by one of us. Tell the postman to bring it again on 
Tuesday." 

"Yes, sir," said Mani, and I left him abruptly; otherwise he 
might have started expanding on the subject. 

We were back on Tuesday. The moment Rosie went up- 
stairs I asked Mani, "Did the parcel arrive.^" 

"No, sir. I waited for the postman, but there was nothing." 

"Did you tell him that we were expecting an insured par- 
cel?" 

185 



"Yes, sir, but there was nothing." 

"Strange!" I cried. "Per return," the lawyers had written. 
They probably wanted the signature, that was all. Perhaps 
Marco planned to appropriate the box himself and had tried 
this ruse. But as long as that lawyer's letter was with me, I 
could hang them; none of their tricks was going to succeed. I 
went to my liquor chest and reread the letter. They had com- 
mitted themselves clearly. "We shall arrange to dispatch, under 
insurance cover . . ." If it meant nothing in a lawyer's letter, 
where was it going to mean anything? I felt somewhat puzzled, 
but told myself that it would ultimately arrive — banks and 
lawyers' offices could not be hustled; they had their own pace 
of work, their own slow red-tape methods. Slow-witted red- 
tapeists — no wonder the country was going to the dogs. I put 
the letter back and locked it up safely. I wished I didn't have 
to go to the liquor chest every time I wanted to read the letter; 
the servants, knowing the contents, might begin to think that 
I took a swill of whisky every few minutes. My desk would be 
the right place for the letter, but I'd a suspicion that Mani 
might see it; if he caught me studying the letter so often, he 
was sure to want to take a look at it by stealing up at my back 
and pretending to have some question to ask. Awful cunning! 
He had worked for me for months and months without my 
noticing anything against him, but now he and everyone 
around appeared sinister, diabolical, and cunning. 

That evening we had an engagement at Kalipet, a small town 
sixty miles away. The organizers were providing a van for 
the musicians, and a Plymouth for me and Nalini, so that we 
might fulfill the engagement and return home the same night. 
It was a benefit show for building a maternity home, and they 
had collected seventy thousand rupees. The price of tickets 
ranged from two hundred and fifty rupees in a kind of fancy 
scale, and officials persuaded businessmen and merchants to 
contribute. Businessmen ungrudgingly paid up on condition 
1 86 



that they were given the nearest seats in the first row. They 
wanted to sit as near the performer as possible, with a chance 
of being noticed. In their thoughts, Nalini, while dancing, 
noted their presence and later inquired, "Who were those im- 
portant men in the front row?'' Poor creatures, they hardly 
knew how Nalini viewed her audience. She often remarked, 
"They might be logs of wood for all I care. When I dance I 
hardly notice any face. I just see a dark well in the auditorium, 
that's all." 

This was a very large-scale function because of official inter- 
est in it; the officials were interested because the chief man of 
the place, who was behind all the shows, was a minister of the 
state cabinet, and it had been his ambition in life to build a 
first-rate maternity center in this area. Knowing the circum- 
stances, I had moderated my demand to a thousand rupees for 
expenses, which meant it was free of income tax. After all, I 
too liked to contribute to a social cause, and certainly we 
would not come out of it too badly anyway. But it was all the 
same for Nalini. Instead of traveling by train, we were going 
by car, that was all. She was pleased that we should be return- 
ing home the same night. 

The show was held in an immense pavilion specially con- 
structed with bamboos and coconut matting and decorated 
with brilliant tapestry, bunting, flowers, and colored lights. 
The stage itself was so beautifully designed that Nalini, who 
generally ignored everything except the flowers at the end, 
cried, "What a lovely place. I feel so happy to dance here.'* 
Over a thousand people were seated in the auditorium. 

She began her first movement, as usual, after a signal from 
me. She entered, carrying a brass lamp, with a song in praise 
of Ganesha, the elephant-faced god, the remover of impedi- 
ments. 

Two hours passed. She was doing her fifth item — 2. snake 
dance, unusually enough. I liked to watch it. This item always 
interested me. As the musicians tuned their instruments and 

187 



played the famous snake song, Nalini came gliding onto the 
stage. She fanned out her fingers slowly, and the yellow spot- 
light, playing on hef white upturned palms, gave them the 
appearance of a cobra hood; she wore a diadem for this act, 
and it sparkled. Lights changed, she gradually sank to the floor, 
the music became slower and slower, the refrain urged the 
snake to dance — the snake that resided on the locks of Shiva 
himself, on the wrist of his spouse, Parvathi, and in the ever- 
radiant home of the gods in Kailas. This was a song that ele- 
vated the serpent and brought out its mystic quality; the 
rhythm was hypnotic. It was her masterpiece. Every inch of 
her body from toe to head rippled and vibrated to the rhythm 
of this song which lifted the cobra out of its class of an under- 
ground reptile into a creature of grace and divinity and an 
ornament of the gods. 

The dance took forty-five minutes in all; the audience 
watched in rapt silence. I was captivated by it. . . . She rarely 
chose to do it indeed. She always said that a special mood was 
needed, and always joked that so much wriggling twisted her 
up too much and she could not stand upright again for days. 
I sat gazing as if I were seeing it for the first time. There came 
to my mind my mother's remark on the first day, "A serpent 
girl! Be careful." I felt sad at the thought of my mother. How 
much she could have enjoyed watching this. What would she 
have said if she could have seen Rosie now, in her shining 
costume and diadem? I felt a regret at the rift that had devel- 
oped between me and my mother. She occasionally wrote me 
a postcard, and I sent her small sums of money now and then, 
dashing off a few lines to say I was well. She often asked when 
I'd get back the house for her — well, that involved a big sum 
and I told myself I'd attend to it as soon as I had some time. 
Anyway, what was the hurry? She was quite happy in the vil- 
lage; that brother of hers looked after her very well. Somehow 
I could never fully forgive her for her treatment of Rosie on 
that fateful day. Well, we were now on cordial terms, but far 
i88 



away from each other, the best possible arrangement. I was 
watching Nalini and at the same time thinking of my mother. 
At this moment one of the men of the organization came up to 
me unobtrusively and said, "You are wanted, sir." 

"Who wants me?" 

"The District Superintendent of Police." 

"Tell him I'll be with him as soon as this act is over." 

He went away. The District Superintendent! He was one of 
my card-playing mates. What did he want to see me about 
now? Of course, the officials were all here, expecting the 
Minister (a sofa was kept vacant for him), and extra police 
were posted to control the crowd and the traffic. After this 
act, when the curtain came down, thunderous applause broke 
out, and I went out. Yes, the District Superintendent was there. 
He was in plain dress. 

"Hello, Superintendent, I didn't know you were coming; 
you could have come with us in the car," I cried. 

He plucked my sleeve and drew me aside because there were 
too many people watching us. We went to a lonely spot under 
a lamp outside, and he whispered, "I'm awfully sorry to say 
this, but I've a warrant for your arrest. It has come from head- 
quarters." 

I smiled awkwardly, partly disbelieving him. I thought he 
was joking. He pulled out a paper. Yes, it was a true and good 
warrant for my arrest on a complaint from Marco, the charge 
being forgery. When I stood ruminating, the Inspector asked, 
**Did you sign any recent document for — for the lady?" 

"Yes; she was busy. But how can you call that forgery?" 

"Did you write 'For' or just write her name?" He plied me 
with questions. "It's a serious charge," he said. "I hope you 
will pull through, but for the moment I have to take you in 
custody." 

I realized the gravity of the situation. I whispered, "Please 
don't create a scene now. Wait until the end of the show, and 
till we are back home." 

189 



"rU have to be with you in the car, and after the warrant 
is served you can arrange for a surety bond till the case is taken 
up. That will leave you free, but first I'm afraid you will have 
to go with me to the magistrate. He has to sanction it. I have 
no powers." 

I went back to my sofa in the hall. They brought me my 
garland. Somebody got up and made a speech thanking the 
dancer and Mr. Raju for their help in getting the collection to 
over seventy thousand rupees. Incidentally he spun out a lot of 
verbiage around the theme of the dance in India, its status, 
philosophy, and purpose. He went on and on. He was a much- 
respected president of the local high school or some such 
thing. There was tremendous applause at the end of his speech. 
More speeches followed. I felt numb, hardly hearing anything. 
I didn't care what they said. I didn't care whether the speech 
was long or short. When it was over, I went to Nalini's 
dressing-room. I found her changing. A number of girls were 
standing around her, some waiting for autographs, and some 
just looking on. I said to Nalini, "We will have to hurry.'* 

I went back to the Superintendent in the corridor, compos- 
ing my looks, trying to look cheerful and unconcerned. A lot 
of the first-row men surrounded me to explain their apprecia- 
tion in minute detail. "She just towers above all others," some- 
one said. "I have seen dancers for a half-century — I'm the sort 
of man who will forgo a meal and walk twenty miles to see a 
dance. But never have I seen," etc., etc. "This maternity home, 
you know, will be the first of its kind. We must have a wing 
named after Miss Nalini. I hope you will be able to come again. 
We would like to have you both for the opening ceremony. 
Could you give us a photograph of her? . . . We'd like to 
enlarge it and hang it in the hall. . . . That'll be a source of 
inspiration for many others, and, who knows, in this very 
building may be born a genius who may follow the footsteps 
of your distinguished wife.'* 

I didn't care what they said. I simply nodded and grunted 
190 



till Nalini came out. I knew that the men surrounded and 
talked to me only in the hope of getting a close view of Nalini. 
As usual, she had her garland; I gave her mine. The Superin- 
tendent led the way unobtrusively to our Plymouth waiting 
outside. We had to v/alk through a crowd buzzing around us 
like flies. The driver held the door open. 

"Get in. Get in," I said impatiently to Nalini. I sat beside her. 
Her face was partially illuminated by a shaft of gaslight from 
a lamp hanging on a tree. Thick dust hung in the air, churned 
up by the traffic; all the vehicles, cars, bullock carts, and jutkas 
were leaving in a mass, with a deafening honking of horns and 
rattle of wheels. A few policemen stood at a discreet distance 
L-nd saluted the Superintendent as our car moved away. He 
occupied the front seat next to the driver. I told her, "Our 
friend, the District Superintendent, is coming back with us to 
the city." 

It was about two hours' journey. She talked for a while 
al )ut the evening. I gave her some comments on her perform- 
ar e. I told her something of what I had heard people say about 
he snake dance. She said, "You are never tired of it," and then 
lapsed into silence and drowsiness, only waiting for our desti- 
nation, as our car whizzed along the country highway, past 
long rows of bullock carts with their jingling bells. "They 
sound like your anklets," I whispered to her clumsily. 

The moment we reached our home, she threw a smile at the 
Superintendent, murmured, "Good night," and vanished into 
the house. The Superintendent said to me, "Let us go now in 
my jeep." It was waiting at the gate. 

I sent away the Plymouth. I said, "I say. Superintendent, 
pyt me a little time, please. I want to tell her about it." 

"All right. Don't delay. We must not get into trouble." 

I went up the staircase. He followed. He stood on the land- 
ing while I went into her room. She listened to me as if I were 
add ^ssing a stone pillar. Even now I can recollect her be- 
wildt ed- stunned expression as she tried to comprehend the 

191 



situation. I thought she would break down. She often broke 
down on small issues, but this seemed to leave her unperturbed. 
She merely said, *'I felt all along you were not doing right 
things. This is karma. What can we do?" She came out to the 
landing and asked the officer, "What shall we do about it, sir? 
Is there no way out?" 

"At the moment I have no discretion, madam. It's a non- 
bailable warrant. But perhaps tomorrow you may apply for 
reconsideration of bond. But we can do nothing till tomorrow, 
till it's moved before the magistrate." He was no longer my 
friend, but a frightful technician. 



192 



Chapter Ten 



.«xSx$x$x$^xS^K$>^x$>^^^xgx$^>^x$x^ 



I 



I HAD to spend a couple of days in the lock-up, among low 
criminals. The District Superintendent ceased to be friendly 
the moment we were in the Central Police Station. He just 
abandoned me to the routine care of the station officer. 

Rosie came to see me in the police lock-up and wept. I sat 
for the first time with my eyes averted, in the fartliest corner 
of the cell. After a while I recovered my composure and told 
her to go and see our banker. All that she asked was, "Oh, we 
had so much money! Where is it all gone?" 

I went back home three days later, but the old, normal life 
was gone. Alani worked in a mechanical manner, with bowed 
head, in his own room. There was no work for him to do. 
Fewer letters arrived for me. There was a sepulchral quiet- 
ness about the house. Nalini's feet were silent upstairs. No 
visitors came. She had had to scrape up a bail bond for ten 
thousand rupees. If I had lived as a normal man of common 
sense, it would not have been difficult to find the amount. As 
it was, I had tied up whatever was left over in several foolish 
share certificates, on which the banks would not advance any 
money, and the rest I had spent in showy living, including the 
advances taken for future engagements. 

I suggested to Rosie, "Why don't you go through with your 
engagements for the next quarter? We should receive the 
balance of the fees." I caught her at dinner, because nowadays 
I spent all my time downstairs and left her alone. I lacked the 

193 



confidence to face her alone in her room. I even spent my 
sleeping hours on the hall sofa. 

She did not answer. I repeated my question, at which she 
muttered, when the cook went in to fetch something, "Must 
we discuss it before the cook?" I accepted the snub meekly. 

I was now a sort of hanger-on in the house; ever since she 
had released me from police custody, the mastery had passed 
to her. I fretted inwardly at the thought of it. When the first 
shock of the affair had subsided, she became hardened. She 
never spoke to me except as to a tramp she had salvaged. It 
could not be helped. She had had to scrape together all her 
resources to help me. She went through her act of help in a 
sort of cold, businesslike manner. I ate my food in silence. 
She deigned to spend some time in the hall after food. She came 
and sat down there. She had a tray of betel leaves by her side 
on the sofa. I pushed it off and dared to seat myself by her side. 
Her lips were reddened with betel juice. Her face was flushed 
with the tingling effect of betel leaves. She looked at me im- 
periously and asked, "Now, what is it?" Before I opened my 
mouth, she added, "Remember, you should speak nothing 
before the cook. The servants are gossiping too much. On the 
first of the month I'm going to send one of them away." 

"Wait, wait. Don't rush," I began. 

"What should I wait for?" Her eyes glistened with tears; she 
blew her nose. I could do nothing about it but just watch. 
After all, the mastery had passed to her and if she thought fit 
to cry, it was her business. She had enough strength in her to 
overcome it if she thought it necessary. It was I that needed 
comforting. I was overwhelmed with a sudden self-pity. Why 
should she cry? She was not on the threshold of a prison. She 
had not been the one who had run hither and thither creating 
glamour and a public for a dancer; it was not she who had 
been fiendishly trapped by a half-forgotten man like Marco — 
an apparent gazer at cave-paintings, but actually venomous and 
vindictive, like the cobra lying in wait for its victim. I can 

194 



now see that it was a very wrong line of thought to adopt. But 
how could I help it? It was only such perverse lines of thought 
and my excessive self-pity that enabled me to survive those 
moments; one needed all that amount of devilry to keep oneself 
afloat. I could give no time for others. I could not bother to 
think of her own troubles, of the mess she had been led into, 
of the financial emptiness after all those months of dancing 
and working, of the surprise sprung upon her by my lack of — 
what should we call it, judgment? No, it was something much 
lower than that. Lack of ordinary character! I see it all now 
clearly, but at that time I still clung to my own grievances, and 
could watch without much perturbation her emotional tan- 
trums. I allowed her to have her cry as usual. She wiped her 
eyes and asked, "You said something when we were eating?" 

"Yes; but you wouldn't let me proceed," I said petulantly. 
"I was asking why you should not go through with the pro- 
grams, at least those for which we have received an advance." 

She remained in thought for a while and said, "Why should 
I?" 

"Because we received only an advance, while what we des- 
perately need is the full fee in every case." 

"Where is all the money?" 

"You should know. The account is all in your name, and 
you may see the bankbook if you like." It was a cruel thing to 
say. Some devil was wagging his tongue within my skull. I 
was suddenly racked with the feeling that after all I had done 
for her she was not sufficiently sympathetic to my cause. 

She spumed continuing this perverse discussion. She merely 
said, "Please tell me what those engagements are and I'll return 
them all their money." 

I knew that this was just a brave statement. Where would 
she find the amount to refund? "Why should you? Why 
should you not go through with them?" 

"Is money your only consideration? Don't you see how I 
can't face the public again?" 



"Why not? If I'm under arrest, I'm under arrest; that is all. 
Not you. Why should you not go about your business nor- 
mally?" 

"I can't; that is all. I can say nothing more." 

I asked coldly, "What do you propose to do in future?" 

"Perhaps I'll go back to him." 

"Do you think he will take you back?" 

"Yes; if I stop dancing." 

I laughed in a sinister manner. "Why do you laugh?" she 
asked. 

"If it were only the question of dancing, he might." 

Why did I talk like this? It hurt her very much. "Yes; you 
are in a position to say such a thing now. He may not admit 
me over the threshold, in which event it is far better to end 
one's life on his doorstep." She remained moody for a while. It 
gave me a profound satisfaction to see her imperiousness shat- 
tered after all. She added, "I think the best solution for all 
concerned would be to be done with this business of living. I 
mean both of us. A dozen sleeping pills in a glass of milk, or 
two glasses of milk. One often hears of suicide pacts. It seems 
to me a wonderful solution, like going on a long holiday. We 
could sit and talk one night perhaps, and sip our glasses of 
milk, and maybe we should wake up in a trouble-free world. 
I'd propose it this very minute if I were sure you would keep 
the pact, but I fear that I may go ahead and you may change 
your mind at the last second." 

"And have the responsibility of disposing of your body?" 
I said, which was the worst thing I could have said. Why was 
I speaking like this again and again? I think I was piqued that 
she would not continue her dancing, was a free creature, while 
I was a jailbird. 

I said, "Is it not better to keep dancing than think these 
morbid thoughts?" I felt I must take charge of her again. 
"Why won't you dance? Is it because you think I won't be 
there to look after you? I'm sure you can manage. And it may 
196 



after all be only for a short time. Oh, there is nothing in this 
case of ours. It'll just break down at the first hearing. You 
take my word for it. It's a false charge." 

"Is it?" she asked. 

"How can they prove anything against me?" 

She merely ignored this legal rambling and said, "Even if 
you are free, I'll not dance in public any more. I am tired of 
all this circus existence." 

"It was your own choice," I said. 

"Not the circus life. I visualized it as something different. 
It's all gone with that old home of yours!" 

"Oh!" I groaned. "And you wouldn't let me rest then. You 
drove me hard to help you come before the public, and now 
you say this! I don't know, I don't know, you are very difficult 
to satisfy." 

"You don't understand!" she cried, and got up and went 
upstairs. She came down a few steps to say, "It does not mean 
I'm not going to help. If I have to pawn my last possession, I'll 
do it to save you from jail. But once it's over, leave me once 
for all; that's all I ask. Forget me. Leave me to live or die, as I 
choose; that's all.'* 

She was as good as her word. A sudden activity seized her. 
She ran about with Mani's help. She sold her diamonds. She 
gathered all the cash she could, selling under par all the 
shares. She kept Mani spinning around. She sent him to Madras 
to pick up a big lawyer for me. When the stress for cash be- 
came acute and she found we would have a lot to make up, 
she became somewhat more practical-minded. She swallowed 
her own words and went through her engagements, shepherd- 
ing the musicians herself, with Mani's help, making all the 
railway arrangements, and so forth. I taunted her as I saw her 
moving around. "You see, this is what I wanted you to do." 
There was no dearth of engagements. In fact, my present 
plight, after a temporary lull, seemed to create an extra inter- 

197 



est. After all, people wanted to enjoy a show, and how could 
they care what happened to me? It hurt me to see her go 
through her work, practice, and engagements unconcernedly. 
Mani was very helpful to her, and those that invited her gave 
her all assistance. Everything went to prove that she could get 
on excellently without me. I felt like telling Mani, "Be careful. 
She'll lead you on before you know where you are, and then 
you will find yourself in my shoes all of a sudden! Beware the 
snake woman!" I knew my mind was not working either 
normally or fairly. I knew I was growing jealous of her self- 
reliance. But I forgot for the moment that she was doing it all 
for my sake. I feared that, in spite of her protestations to the 
contrary, she would never stop dancing. She would not be 
able to stop. She would go from strength to strength. I knew, 
looking at the way she was going about her business, that she 
would manage — whether I was inside the bars or outside; 
whether her husband approved of it or not. Neither Marco nor 
I had any place in her life, which had its own sustaining vitality 
and which she herself had underestimated all along. 

Our lawyer had his own star value. His nam6 spelled magic 
in all the court-halls of this part of the country. He had saved 
many a neck (sometimes more than once) from the noose, he 
had absolved many a public swindler in the public eye and in 
the eye of the law, he could prove a whole gang of lawless 
hooligans to be innocent victims of a police conspiracy. He set 
at nought all the laboriously built-up case of the prosecution, 
he made their story laughable, he picked the most carefully 
packed evidence between his thumb and forefinger and with a 
squeeze reduced it to thin air; he was old-fashioned in appear- 
ance, with his long coat and an orthodox-style dhoti and tur- 
ban and over it all his black gown. His eyes scintillated with 
mirth and confidence when he stood at the bar and addressed 
the court. When the judge's eyes were lowered over the papers 
on his desk, he inhaled a deep pinch of snuff with the utmost 
198 



elegance. We feared at one stage that he might refuse to take 
our case, considering it too slight for his attention; but fortu- 
nately he undertook it as a concession from one star to another 
— for Nalini's sake. When the news came that he had accepted 
the brief (a thousand rupees it cost us to get this out of him), 
we felt as if the whole case against me had been dropped by 
the police with apologies for the inconvenience caused. But he 
was expensive — each consultation had to be bought for cash 
at the counter. He was in his own way an "adjournment law- 
yer." A case in his hands was like dough; he could knead and 
draw it up and down. He split a case into minute bits and de- 
manded as many days for microscopic examination. He would 
keep the court fidgeting without being able to rise for lunch, 
because he could talk without completing a sentence; he had a 
knack of telescoping sentence into sentence without pausing 
for breath. 

He arrived by the morning train and left by the evening one, 
and until that time he neither moved off the court floor nor let 
the case progress even an inch for the day — so that a judge 
had to wonder how the day had spent itself. Thus he prolonged 
the lease of freedom for a criminal within the available time, 
whatever might be the final outcome. But this meant also for 
the poor case-stricken man more expense, as his charges per 
day were seven hundred and fifty rupees, and he had to be 
paid railway and other expenses as well, and he never came 
without juniors to assist him. 

He presented my case as a sort of comedy in three acts, in 
which the chief villain was Marco, an enemy of civilized 
existence. Marco was the first prosecution witness for the day, 
and I could see him across the hall wincing at every assault 
mounted against him by my star lawyer. He must have wished 
that he had not been foolhardy enough to press charges. He 
had his own lawyer, of course, but he looked puny and 
frightened. 

199 



The first part of the comedy was that the villain wanted to 
drive his wife mad; the second part of the comedy was that 
the wife survived this onslaught, and on the point of privation 
and death was saved by a humble humanitarian called Raju, 
who sacrificed his time and profession for the protection of the 
lady and enabled her to rise so high in the world of the arts. 
Her life was a contribution to the prestige of our nation and 
our cultural traditions. When the whole world was thirsting 
for Bharat Natya, here was this man slighting it, and when she 
made a big name for herself, someone's gorge rose. Someone 
wanted to devise a way of blowing up this whole edifice of a 
helpless lady's single-handed upward career. Your Honor. And 
then the schemer brought out the document — a document 
which had been forgotten and lain in concealment for so many 
years. There was some other motive in involving the lady by 
gettinCT her to si^n the document — he would cro into it at a later 
part of the argument. (It was his favorite device to make some- 
thing look sinister; he never found the opportunity to return 
to it later.) Why should anyone want to trot out a document 
which had been kept back for all those years? Why did he 
leave it alone so long? Our lawyer would leave the point for 
the present without a comment. He looked about like a hound 
scenting a fox. The document. Your Honor, was returned 
without signature. The idea was not to get involved, and the 
lady was not the type to get caught by jewelry; she cared little 
for it. And so the document was unsigned and returned, the 
good man Raju himself carrying it to the post office in order to 
make sure of its dispatch, as the postmaster would testify. So it 
was a big disappointment for the schemer when the document 
went back unsigned. So they thought of another trick — some- 
one copied the lady's signature on it and took it to the police. 
It was not his business to indicate who could have done it; he 
was not interested in the question. He was only interested to 
the extent of saying categorically that it was not his client who 
200 



had done it; and unhesitatinMy he woula recommend that he 
should be immediately discharged and exonerated. 

But the prosecution case was strong, though unspectacular. 
They put Mani in the box and examined him till he blurted 
out that I was desperately looking for an insured parcel every 
day; the postmaster was cross-examined and had to admit that 
I had seemed unusual, and finally it was the handwriting expert 
who testified that it could reasonably be taken to be my hand- 
writing — he had detailed proofs from my writings on the backs 
of checks, on receipts and letters. 

The judge sentenced me to two years' imprisonment. Our 
star lawyer looked gratified, I should properly have got seven 
years according to law books, but his fluency knocked five 
years off, though, if I had been a little careful . . . 

The star lawyer did not achieve this end all at once, but over 
a period of many months, while Nalini worked harder than 
ever to keep the lawyer as well as our household going. 

I was considered a model prisoner. Now I realized that people 
generally thought of me as being unsound and worthless, not 
because I deserved the label, but because they had been seeing 
me in the wrong place all along. To appreciate me, they should 
really have come to the Central Jail and watched me. No doubt 
my movements were somewhat restricted: I had to get out of 
bed at an hour when I'd rather stay in, and turn in when Fd 
rather stay out — that was morning five and evening five. But 
in between these hours I was the master of the show. I visited 
all departments of the prison as a sort of benevolent supervisor. 
I got on well with all the warders: I relieved them in their jobs 
when other prisoners had to be watched. I watched the weaving 
section and the carpentry sheds. Whether they were homicides 
or cutthroats or highwaymen, they all listened to me, and I 
could talk them out of their blackest moods. When there was a 
respite, I told them stories and philosophies and what not. They 

20I 



came to refer to me as Vadhyar — that is, Teacher. There were 
five hundred prisoners in that building and I could claim to 
have established a fairly widespread intimacy with most of 
them. I got on well with the officials too. When the jail super- 
intendent went about his inspections, I was one of those privi- 
leged to walk behind him and listen to his remarks; and I ran 
little errands for him, which endeared me to him. He had only 
to look ever so slightly to his left, and I knew what he wanted. 
I dashed up and called the warder he was thinking of calling; 
he had only to hesitate for a second, and I knew he wanted 
that pebble on the road to be picked up and thrown away. It 
pleased him tremendously. In addition, I was in a position to 
run ahead and warn warders and other subordinates of his ar- 
rival — and that gave them time to rouse themselves from brief 
naps and straighten out their turbans. 

I worked incessantly on a vegetable patch in the back yard 
of the superintendent's home. I dug the earth and drew water 
from the well and tended it carefully. I put fences round, with 
brambles and thorns so that cattle did not destroy the plants. 
I grew huge brinjals and beans, and cabbages. When they ap- 
peared on their stalks as tiny buds, I was filled with excitement. 
I watched them develop, acquire shape, change color, shed the 
early parts. When the harvest was ready, I plucked them off 
their stalks tenderly, washed them, wiped them clean to a 
polish with the end of my jail jacket, arranged them artistically 
on a tray of woven bamboo (I'd arranged to get one from the 
weaving shed), and carried them in ceremoniously. When he 
saw the highly polished brinjals, greens, and cabbage, the super- 
intendent nearly hugged me for joy. He was a lover of vege- 
tables. He was a lover of good food, wherever it came from. 
I loved every piece of this work, the blue sky and sunshine, 
and the shade of the house in which I sat and worked, the feel 
of cold water; it produced in me a luxurious sensation. Oh, it 
seemed to be so good to be alive and feeling all this — the smell 
of freshly turned earth filled me with the greatest delight. If 
202 



this was prison life, why didn't more people take to it? They 
thought of it with a shudder, as if it were a place where a man 
was branded, chained, and lashed from morning to night! 
Medieval notions! No place could be more agreeable; if you 
observed the rules you earned greater appreciation here than 
beyond the high walls. I got my food, I had my social life with 
the other inmates and the staff, I moved about freely within an 
area of fifty acres. Well, that's a great deal of space when you 
come to think of it; man generally manages with much less. 
"Forget the walls, and you will be happy," I told some of the 
newcomers, who became moody and sullen the first few days. 
I felt amused at the thought of the ignorant folk who were 
horrified at the idea of a jail. Maybe a man about to be hanged 
might not have the same view; nor one who had been insubor- 
dinate, or violent; but short of these, all others could be happy 
here. I felt choked with tears when I had to go out after two 
years, and I wished that we had not wasted all that money on 
our lawyer. I'd have been happy to stay in this prison perma- 
nently. 

The superintendent transferred me to his office as his per- 
sonal servant. I took charge of his desk, filled his inkwells, 
cleaned his pens, mended his pencil, and waited outside his 
door to see that no one disturbed him v/hile he worked. If he 
so much as thought of me, I went in and stood before him, I 
was so alert. He gave me file boxes to carry to his outer office; 
I brought in the file boxes that they gave back to his table. 
When he was away the newspapers arrived. I took charge of 
them and glanced through their pages before taking them to 
him. I don't think he ever minded; he really liked to read his 
paper in bed, after his lunch, in the process of snatching a 
siesta. I quietly glanced through the speeches of world states- 
men, descriptions of the Five Year Plan, of ministers opening 
bridges or distributing prizes, nuclear explosions, and world 
crises. I gave them all a cursory look. 

But on Friday and Saturday I turned the last page of the 

203 



Hindu with trembling fingers — and the last column in its top 
portion always displayed the same block, Nalini's photograph, 
the name of the institution where she was performing, and the 
price of tickets. Now at this corner of South India, now there, 
next week in Ceylon, and another week in Bombay or Delhi. 
Her empire was expanding rather than shrinking. It filled me 
with gall that she should go on without me. Who sat now on 
that middle sofa? How could the performance start without 
my signal with the small finger? How could she know when 
to stop? She probably went on and on, while others just 
watched without the wit to stop her. I chuckled to myself at 
the thought of how she must have been missing her trains after 
every performance. I opened the pages of the paper only to 
study her engagements and to calculate how much she might 
be earning. Unless she wrote up her accounts with forethought, 
super-tax would swallow what she so laboriously piled up with 
all that twisting and writhing of her person! I would have 
suspected Alani of having stepped into my shoes, and that 
would have provided more gall for me to swallow, but for the 
fact that in the early months of my stay Mani came to see me 
on a visitor's day. 

Mani was the only visitor I had in prison; all other friends 
and relatives seemed to have forgotten me. He came because 
he felt saddened by my career. He wore a look of appropriate 
gloom and seriousness as he waited for me. But when I told 
him, "This is not a bad place. You too should come here, if you 
can," he looked horrified and never saw me again. But in the 
thirty minutes he was with me he gave me all the news. Nalini 
had cleared out of the town, bag and baggage. She had settled 
down at Madras and was looking after herself quite well. She 
had given Mani a gift of one thousand rupees on the day that 
she left. She had a hundred bouquets of garlands presented to 
her on the railway platform. What a huge crowd had gathered 
to see her off! Before her departure she had methodically 
drawn up a list of all our various debts and discharged them 
204 



fully; she had all the furniture and other possessions at our 
house turned over to an auctioneer. Mani explained that the 
only article that she carried out of the house was the book — 
which she came upon when she broke open the liquor casket 
and had all the liquor thrown out. She found the book tucked 
away inside, picked it up, and took it away carefully. 

"That was my book. Why should she take it?" I cried child- 
ishly. I added, "She seems to think it a mighty performance, I 
suppose! . . . Did it please him? Or did it have any useful 
effect?" I asked devilishly. 

Mani said, "After the case, she got into the car and went 
home, and he got into his and went to the railway station — 
they didn't meet." 

"I'm happy at least about this one thing," I said. "She had 
the self-respect not to try and fall at his feet again." 

Mani added before going away, "I saw your mother recently. 
She is keeping well in the village." At the court hall my mother 
had been present. She had come on the last day of the hearing, 
thanks to our local "adjournment lawyer," who was my link 
generally with her, as he continued to handle the tortuous and 
prolonged affair of half my house being pledged to the Sait. He 
had been excited beyond words at the arrival of the glamorous 
lawyer from Madras, whom we put up at the Taj in the best 
suite. 

Our little lawyer seemed to have been running around in 
excitement. He went to the extent of rushing to the village and 
fetching my mother — for what purpose he alone knew. For 
my mother was overcome with my plight as I stood in the 
dock; when Rosie approached her to say a few words in the 
corridor, her eyes flashed, "Now are you satisfied with what 
you have done to him?" And the girl shrank away from her. 
This was reported to me by my mother herself, whom I ap- 
proached during the court recess. My mother was standing in 
the doorway. She had never seen the inside of a court hall, and 
was overwhelmed with a feeling of her own daring. She said 

205 



to me, "What a shame you have brought on yourself and on 
all known to you! I used to think that the worst that could 
happen to you might be death, as when you had that pneu- 
monia for weeks; but I now wish that rather than survive and 
go through this . . ." She could not complete her sentence; 
she broke down and went along the corridor and out before 
we assembled again to hear the judgment. 



206 



Chapter Eleven 



■^^^^$x$kS>^«$x$«$^x$x$h$k$xJ^$^>^>^ 



Raju's narration concluded with the crowing of the cock. 
Velan had listened without moving a muscle, supporting his 
back against the ancient stone railing along the steps. Raju 
felt his throat smarting with the continuous talk all night. The 
village had not yet wakened to life. Velan yielded himself to a 
big yawn, and remained silent. Raju had mentioned without a 
single omission every detail from his birth to his emergence 
from the gates of the prison. He imagined that Velan would 
rise with disgust and swear, "And we took you for such a noble 
soul all along! If one like you does penance, it'll drive off even 
the little rain that we may hope for. Begone, you, before we 
feel tempted to throw you out. You have fooled us." 

Raju waited for these words as if for words of reprieve. He 
looked on Velan's silence with anxiety and suspense, as if he 
waited on a judge's verdict again, a second time. The judge 
here seemed to be one of sterner cast than the one he had en- 
countered in the court hall. Velan kept still — so still that Raju 
feared that he had fallen asleep. 

Raju asked, "Now you have heard me fully?" like a lawyer 
who has a misgiving that the judge has been woolgathering. 

"Yes, Swami." 

Raju was taken aback at still being addressed as "Swami." 
"What do you think of it?" 

Velan looked quite pained at having to answer such a ques- 
tion. "I don't know why you tell me all this, Swami. It's very 

207 



kind of you to address at such length your humble servant." 
Every respectful word that this man employed pierced Raju 
like a shaft. "He will not leave me alone," Raju thought with 
resignation. "This man will finish me before I know where I 
am." 

After profound thought, the judge rose in his seat. "I'll go 
back to the village to do my morning duties. I will come back 
later. And I'll never speak a word of what I have heard to 
anyone." He dramatically thumped his chest. "It has gone 
down there, and there it will remain." With this, he made a 
deep obeisance, went down the steps and across the sandy river. 

A wandering newspaper correspondent who had come to the 
village picked up the news. The government had sent a com- 
mission to inquire into the drought conditions and suggest 
remedies, and with it came a press correspondent. While waa- 
dering around he heard about the Swamiji, went to the temple 
across the river, and sent off a wire to his paper at Madras, 
which circulated in all the towns of India. "Holy man's pen- 
ance to end drought," said the heading, and then a brief de- 
scription followed. 

This was the starting point. 

Public interest was roused. The newspaper office was be- 
sieged for more news. They ordered the reporter to go back. 
He sent a second telegram to say "Fifth day of fast." He de- 
scribed the scene: how the Swami came to the river's edge, 
faced its source, stood knee-deep in the water, from six to 
eight in the morning, muttering something between his lips, 
his eyes shut, his palms pressed together in a salute to the gods, 
presumably. It had been difficult enough to find knee-deep 
water, but the villagers had made an artificial basin in sand and, 
when it didn't fill, fetched water from distant wells and filled 
it, so that the man had always knee-deep water to stand in. The 
holy man stood there for two hours, then walked up the steps 
slowly and lay down on a mat in the pillared hall of the temple, 
208 



while his devotees kept fanning him continuously. He took 
notice of hardly anyone, though there was a big crowd around. 
He fasted totally. He lay down and shut his eyes in order that 
his penance might be successful. For that purpose he conserved 
all his energy. When he was not standing in the water, he was 
in deep meditation. The villagers had set aside all their normal 
avocations in order to be near this great soul all the time. When 
he slept they remained there, guarding him, and though there 
was a fair-sized crowd, it remained totally silent. 

But each day the crowd increased. In a week there was a 
permanent hum pervading the place. Children shouted and 
played about, women came carrying baskets filled with pots, 
firewood, and foodstuffs, and cooked the food for their men 
and children. There were small curls of smoke going up all 
along the river bank, on the opposite slope and on this bank 
also. It was studded with picnic groups, with the women's 
bright-colored saris shining in the sun; men too had festive 
dress. Bullocks unyoked from their carts jingled their bells as 
they ate the straw under the trees. People swarmed around little 
water-holes. 

Raju saw them across his pillared hall whenever he opened 
his eyes. He knew what that smoke meant; he knew that they 
were eating and enjoying themselves. He wondered what they 
might be eating — rice boiled with a pinch of saffron, melted 
ghee — and what were the vegetables? Probably none in this 
drought. The sight tormented him. 

This was actually the fourth day of his fast. Fortunately, on 
the first day he had concealed a little stale food, left over from 
the previous day, in an aluminum vessel behind a stone pillar 
in the innermost sanctum — some rice mixed with buttermilk, 
and a piece of vegetable thrown in. Fortunately, too, he was 
able on the first day to snatch a little privacy at the end of the 
day's prayer and penance, late at night. The crowd had not been 
so heavy then. Velan had business at home and had gone, leav- 

209 



ing two others to attend on the Swami. The Swami had been 
lying on the mat in the pillared hall, with the two villagers 
looking on and waving a huge palmyra fan at his face. He had 
felt weakened by his day's fasting. He had suddenly told them, 
"Sleep, if you like; I'll be back," and he rose in a businesslike 
manner and passed into his inner sanctum. 

"I don't have to tell the fellows where I am going or why 
or how long I shall be gone out of sight." He felt indignant. 
He had lost all privacy. People all the time watching and star- 
ing, lynx-eyed, as if he were a thief! In the inner sanctum he 
briskly thrust his hand into a niche and pulled out his aluminum 
pot. He sat down behind the pedestal, swallowed his food in 
three or four large mouthfuls, making as little noise as possible. 
It was stale rice, dry and stiff and two days old; it tasted awful, 
but it appeased his hunger. He washed it down with water. He 
went to the back yard and rinsed his mouth noiselessly — ^he 
didn't want to smell of food when he went back to his mat. 

Lying on his mat, he brooded. He felt sick of the whole 
thing. When the assembly was at its thickest, could he not 
stand up on a high pedestal and cry, "Get out, all of you, and 
leave me alone, I am not the man to save you. No power on 
earth can save you if you are doomed. Why do you bother me 
with all this fasting and austerity?" It would not help. They 
might enjoy it as a joke. He had his back to the wall, there was 
no further retreat. This realization helped him to get through 
the trial with a little more resignation on the second day of his 
penance. Once again he stood up in water, muttering with his 
face to the hills, and watching the picnic groups enjoying 
themselves all over the place. At night he left Velan for a while 
and sneaked in to look for leftover food in his aluminum vessel 
— it was really an act of desperation. He knew full well that he 
had polished the vessel the previous night. Still he hoped, 
childishly, for a miracle. "When they want me to perform all 
sorts of miracles, why not make a start with my own aluminum 
vessel?" he reflected caustically. He felt weak. He was enraged 

2IO 



at the emptiness of his larder. He wondered for a moment if He 
could make a last desperate appeal to Velan to let him eat — 
and if only he minded, how he could save him! Velan ought 
to know, yet the fool would not stop thinking that he was a 
savior. He banged down the aluminum vessel in irritation and 
went back to his mat. What if the vessel did get shattered? It 
was not going to be of any use. What was the point of pamper- 
ing an empty vessel? When he was seated, Velan asked respect- 
fully, "What was that noise, master?" 

"An empty vessel. Have you not heard the saying, *An 
empty vessel makes much noise'?" 

Velan permitted himself a polite laugh and declared with 
admiration, "How many good sentiments and philosophies you 
have gathered in that head of yours, sir! " 

Raju almost glared at him. This single man was responsible 
for his present plight. Why would he not go away and leave 
him alone? What a wise plan it would have been if the croco- 
dile had got him while he crossed the river! But that poor old 
thing, which had remained almost a myth, had become dehy- 
drated. When its belly was ripped open they found in it ten 
thousand rupees' worth of jewelry. Did this mean that the 
crocodile had been in the habit of eating only women? No, 
a few snuffboxes and earrings of men were also found. The 
question of the day was: Who was entitled to all this treasure? 
The villagers hushed up the affair. They did not want the 
government to get scent of it and come round and claim it, 
as it did all buried treasure. They gave out that only a couple 
of worthless trinkets had been found inside the crocodile, al- 
though in actual fact the man who cut it open acquired a 
fortune. He had no problems for the rest of liis life. Who 
permitted him to cut open the crocodile? Who could say? 
People didn't wait for permission under such circumstances. 
Thus had gone on the talk among the people about the croco- 
dile when it was found dead. 

Velan, fanning him, had fallen asleep — he had just doubled 

211 



up in his seat with the fan in his hand. Raju, who lay awake, 
had let his mind roam and touch the depths of morbid and 
fantastic thought. He was now touched by the sight of this 
man hunched in his seat. The poor fellow was tremendously 
excited and straining himself in order to make this penance a 
success, providing the great man concerned with every com- 
fort — except, of course, food. Why not give the poor devil a 
chance? Raju said to himself, instead of hankering after food 
which one could not get an^n^ay. He felt enraged at the per- 
sistence of food-thousrhts. With a sort of vindictive resolution 
he told himself, "I'll chase away all thought of food. For the 
next ten days I shall eradicate all thoughts of tongue and 
stomach from my mind." 

This resolution gave him a peculiar strength. He developed 
on those lines: "If by avoiding food I should help the trees 
bloom, and the grass grow, why not do it thoroughly?" For 
the first time in his life he was making an earnest effort; for 
the first time he was learning the thrill of full application, out- 
side money and love; for the first time he was doing a thing 
in which he was not personally interested. He felt suddenly 
so enthusiastic that it gave him a new strength to go through 
with the ordeal. The fourth day of his fast found him quite 
sprightly. He went down to the river, stood facing upstream 
with his eyes shut, and repeated the litany. It was no more than 
a supplication to the heavens to send down rain and save 
humanity. It was set in a certain rhythmic chant, which lulled 
his senses and awareness, so that as he went on saying it over 
and over again the world around became blank. He nearly lost 
all sensation, except the numbness at his knees, through con- 
stant contact with cold water. Lack of food gave him a peculiar 
floating feeling, which he rather enjoyed, with the thought in 
the background, "This enjoyment is something Velan cannot 
take away from me." 

The hum of humanity around was increasing. His awareness 
of his surroundings was gradually lessening in a sort of inverse 

212 



proportion. He was not aware of it, but the world was begin- 
ning to press around. The pen of the wandering journalist had 
done the trick. Its repercussions were far and wide. The rail- 
ways were the first to feel the pressure. They had to run spe- 
cial trains for the crowds that were going to Malgudi. People 
traveled on footboards and on the roofs of coaches. The little 
Malgudi Station was choked with passengers. Outside the sta- 
tion buses stood, the conductors crying, "Special for Mangala 
leaving. Hurry up. Hurry up." People rushed up from the 
station into the buses and almost sat on top of one another. 
Gaffur's taxi drove up and down a dozen times a day. And the 
crowd congregated around the river at Mangala. People sat in 
groups along its sand bank, down its stones and steps, all the 
way up the opposite bank, wherever they could squeeze them- 
selves in. 

Never had this part of the country seen such a crowd. Shops 
sprang up overnight, as if by magic, on bamboo poles roofed 
with thatch, displaying colored soda bottles and bunches of 
bananas and coconut toffees. The Tea Propaganda Board 
opened a big tea stall, and its posters, green tea plantations 
along the slopes of blue mountains, were pasted all around the 
temple wall. (People drank too much coffee and too little tea 
in these parts.) It had put up a tea bar and served free tea in 
porcelain cups all day. The public swarmed around it like flies, 
and the flies swarmed on all the cups and sugar bowls. The 
presence of the fly brought in the Health Department, which 
feared an outbreak of some epidemic in that crowded place 
without water. The khaki-clad health inspectors sprayed every 
inch of space with DDT and, with needle in hand, coaxed 
people to inoculate themselves against cholera, malaria, and 
what not. A few youngsters just for fun bared their biceps, 
while a big crowd stood about and watched. There was a blank 
space on the rear wall of the temple where they cleaned up 
the ground and made a space for people to sit around and 
watch a film show when it grew dark. They attracted people 

213 



to it by playing popular hits on the gramophone with its loud- 
speakers mounted on the withering treetops. Men, women, and 
children crowded in to watch the film shows, which were all 
about mosquitoes, malaria, plague, and tuberculosis, and BCG 
vaccination. When a huge close-up of a mosquito was shown 
as the cause of malaria, a peasant was overheard saying, "Such 
huge mosquitoes! No wonder the people get malaria in those 
countries. Our own mosquitoes are so tiny that they are harm- 
less," which depressed the lecturer on malaria so much that 
he remained silent for ten minutes. When he had done with 
health, he showed a few Government of India films about dams, 
river valleys, and various projects, with ministers delivering 
speeches. Far oflF, outside the periphery, a man had opened a 
gambling booth with a dart board on a pole, and he had also 
erected a crude merry-go-round, which whined all day. Ped- 
dlers of various kinds were also threading in and out, selling 
balloons, reed whistles, and sweets. 

A large crowd always stood around and watched the saint 
with profound awe. They touched the water at his feet and 
sprinkled it over their heads. They stood indefinitely around, 
until the master of ceremonies, Velan, begged them to move. 
"Please go away. The Swami must have fresh air. If you have 
had your darshan, move on and let others have theirs. Don't 
be selfish." And then the people moved on and enjoyed them- 
selves in various ways. 

When the Swami went in to lie on his mat in the hall, they 
came in again to look at him and stood about until Velan once 
again told them to keep moving. A few were specially privi- 
leged to sit on the edge of the mat very close to the great man. 
One of them was the schoolmaster, who took charge of all the 
telegrams and letters that were pouring in from, all over the 
country wishing the Swami success. The post office at Mangala 
normally had a visiting postman who came once a week, and 
when a telegram came it was received at Aruna, a slightly big- 
ger village seven miles down the river course, and was kept 
214 



there until someone could be found going to Mangala. But now 
the little telegraph office had no rest — day and night messages 
poured in, just addressed, "Swamiji," that was all. They were 
piling up every hour and had to be sent down by special mes- 
sengers. In addition to the arriving telegrams, there were many 
going out. The place was swarming with press reporters, who 
were rushing their hour-to-hour stories to their papers all over 
the world. They were an aggressive lot and the little telegraph 
master was scared of them. They banged on his window and 
cried, "Urgent!" They held out packets and packed-up films 
and photographs, and ordered him to dispatch them at once. 
They cried, "Urgent, urgent! If this packet does not reach my 
office today . . ." and they threatened terrifying prospects 
and said all sorts of frightening things. 

*^Press. Urgent!" "Press. Urgent!" They went on shouting till 
they reduced the man to a nervous wreck. He had promised 
his children that he would take them to see the Swamiji. The 
children cried, "They are also showing an Ali Baba film, a 
friend told me." But the man was given no time to fulfill his 
promise to his children. When the press men gave him respite, 
the keys rattled with incoming messages. He had spent a fairly 
peaceful life until then, and the present strain tore at his nerves. 
He sent off an SOS to all his official superiors whenever he 
found breathing space: "Handling two hundred messages to- 
day. Want relief." 

The roads were choked with traffic, country carts, buses 
and cycles, jeeps and automobiles of all kinds and ages. Pedes- 
trians in files with hampers and baskets crossed the fields like 
swarms of ants converging on a lump of sugar. The air rang 
with the music of a few who had chosen to help the Swami 
by sitting near him, singing devotional songs to the accompani- 
ment of a harmonium and tabala. 

The busiest man here was an American, wearing a thin bush 
shirt over corduroys. He arrived in a jeep with a trailer, dusty, 
rugged, with a mop of tousled hair, at about one in the after- 

215 



noon on the tenth day of the fast and set himself to work 
immediately. He had picked up an interpreter at Madras and 
had driven straight through, three hundred and seventy-five 
miles. He pushed everything aside and took charge of the 
scene. He looked about for only a moment, driving his jeep 
down to the hibiscus bush behind the temple. He jumped off 
and strode past everyone to the pillared hall. He went up to the 
recumbent Swami and brought his palms together, muttering, 
^^Namaste^'' — the Indian salute, which he had learned the mo- 
ment he landed in India. He had briefed himself on all the local 
manners. Raju looked on him with interest — the large, pink- 
faced arrival was a novel change in the routine. 

The pink visitor stooped low to ask the schoolmaster, sitting 
beside the Swami, "Can I speak to him in English?" 

"Yes. He knows English." 

The man lowered himself onto the edge of the mat and with 
difiiculty sat down on the floor, Indian fashion, crossing his 
legs. He bent close to the Swami to say, "I'm James J. Malone. 
I'm from California. My business is production of films and 
TV shows. I have come to shoot this subject, take it back to 
our country, and show it to our people there. I have in my 
pocket the sanction from New Delhi for this project. May I 
have yours?" 

Raju thought over it and serenely nodded. 

"Okay. Thanks a lot. I won't disturb you — but will you let 
me shoot pictures of you? I wouldn't disturb you. Will it 
bother you if I move a few things up and fix the cable and 
Hghts?" 

"No; you may do your work," said the sage. 

The man became extremely busy. He sprang to his feet, 
pulled the trailer into position, and started his generator. Its 
throbbing filled the place, overwhelming all other noises. It 
brought in a huge crowd of men, women, and children to 
watch the fun. All the other attractions in the camp became 
secondary. As Malone drew the cables about, a big crowd f ol- 
216 



lowed him. He grinned at them affably and went about his 
business. Velan and one or two others ran through the crowd, 
crying, "Is this a fish market? Get away, all of you who have 
no work here!" But nobody was affected by his orders. They 
climbed pillars and pedestals and clung to all sorts of places to 
reach positions of vantage. Malone went on with his job with- 
out noticing anything. Finally, when he had the lights ready, 
he brought in his camera and took pictures of the people and 
the temple, and of the Swami from various angles and dis- 
tances. 

"I'm sorry, Swami, if the light is too strong." When he 
had finished with the pictures, he brought in a microphone, put 
it near the Swami's face, and said, "Let us chat. Okay? Tell me, 
how do you like it here?" 

"I am only doing what I have to do; that's all. My likes and 
dislikes do not count." 

"How long have you been without food now?" 

"Ten days." 

"Do you feel weak?" 

"Yes." 

"When will you break your fast?" 

"Twelfth day." 

"Do you expect to have the rains by then?" 

"Why not?" 

"Can fasting abolish all wars and bring world peace?" 

"Yes." 

"Do you champion fasting for everyone?" 

"Yes." 

"What about the caste system? Is it going?" 

"Yes." 

"Will you tell us something about your early life?" 

"What do you want me to say?" 

"Er — for instance, have you always been a Yogi?" 

**Yes; more or less." 

It was very hard for the Swami to keep up a continuous flow 

217 



of talk. He felt exhausted and lay back. Velan and others 
looked on with concern. The schoolmaster said, "He is fa- 
tigued.*' 

"Well, I guess we will let him rest for a while. Fm sorry to 
bother you." 

The Swami lay back with his eyes closed. A couple of doc- 
tors, deputed by the government to watch and report, went to 
the Swami, felt his pulse and heart. They helped him to stretch 
himself on the mat. A big hush fell upon the crowd. Velan 
plied his fan more vigorously than ever. He looked distraught 
and unhappy. In fact, keeping a sympathetic fast, he was now 
eating on alternate days, confining his diet to saltless boiled 
greens. He looked worn out. He. said to the master, "One more 
day. I don't know how he is going to bear it. I dread to think 
how he can pull through another day." 

Malone resigned himself to waiting. He looked at the doctor 
and asked, "How do you find him?" 

"Not very satisfactory; blood pressure is two hundred sys- 
tolic. We suspect one of the kidneys is affected. Uremia is set- 
ting in. We are trying to give him small doses of saline and 
glucose. His life is valuable to the country." 

"Would you say a few words about his health?" Malone 
asked, thrusting his microphone forward. He was sitting on the 
head of a carved elephant decorating the steps to the pillared 
hall. 

The doctors looked at each other in panic and said, "Sorry, 
We are government servants — ^we cannot do it without per- 
mission. Our reports are released only from headquarters. We 
cannot give them direct. Sorry." 

"Okay. I wouldn't hurt' your customs." He looked at his 
watch and said, "I guess that's all for the day." He approached 
the schoolmaster and said, "Tell me, what time does he step 
into the river tomorrow?" 

"Six a.m." 

"Could you come over and show me the location?" The 
218 



schoolmaster got up and took him along. The man said, **Wait, 
wait. You'll not mind understudying for him for a minute. 
Show me where he starts from, how he goes up, and where 
he stops and stands." 

The teacher hesitated, feeling too shy to understudy the 
sage. The man urged him on. "Come on; be cooperative. Til 
take care of it, if there is any trouble." 

The teacher started from the pedestal. "He starts here. Now 
follow me." He showed the whole route down to the river, 
and the spot where the Swami would stop and pray, standing 
in water for two hours. The crowd followed keenly every 
inch of this movement, and someone in the crowd was joking, 
"Oh! The master is also going to do penance and starve!" And 
they all laughed. 

Malone threw a smile at them from time to time, although 
he did not know what they were saying. He surveyed the 
place from various angles, measured the distance from the 
generator, shook the schoolmaster's hand, and went back to his 
jeep. "See you tomorrow morning." He drove off amidst a 
great roar and puffing of his engine as his jeep rattled over the 
pits and ditches beyond the hibiscus, until he reached the road. 

The eleventh day, morning. The crowd, pouring in all night, 
had nearly trebled itself because it was the last day of the fast. 
All night one could hear voices of people and the sound of 
vehicles rattling over the roads and pathways. Velan and a 
band of his assistants formed a cordon and kept the crowd 
out of the pillared hall. They said, "The Swami must have fresh 
air to breathe. It's the only thing he takes now. Don't choke 
the air. Everyone can have his darshan at the river. I promise. 
Go away now. He is resting." It was an all-night vigil. The 
numerous lanterns and lamps created a crisscross of bewildering 
shadows on all hedges, trees, and walls. 

At five-thirty in the morning the doctors examined the 
Swami. They wrote and signed a bulletin saying: "Swami's 
condition grave. Declines glucose and saline. Should break the 

219 



fast immediately. Advise procedure." They sent a man running 
to send off this telegram to their headquarters. 

It was a top-priority governrr.ent telegram, and it fetched a 
reply within an hour: "Imperative that Swami should be saved. 
Persuade best to cooperate. Should not risk life. Try give 
glucose and saline. Persuade Swami resume fast later." 

They set beside the Swami and read the message to him. 
He smiled at it. He beckoned Velan to come nearer. 

The doctors appealed, "Tell him he should save himself. 
Please, do your best. He is very weak." 

Velan bent close to the Swami and said, "The doctors say — ^" 

In answer Raju asked the man to bend nearer, and whispered, 
"Help me to my feet," and clung to his arm and lifted himself. 
He got up to his feet. He had to be held by Velan and another 
on each side. In the profoundest silence the crowd followed 
him down. Everyone followed at a solemn, silent pace. The 
eastern sky was red. Many in the camp were still sleeping. Raju 
could not walk, but he insisted upon pulling himself along all 
the same. He panted with the effort. He went down the steps 
of the river, halting for breath on each step, and finally reached 
his basin of water. He stepped into it, shut his eyes, and turned 
toward the mountain, his lips muttering the prayer. Velan and 
another held him each by an arm. The morning sun was out 
by now; a great shaft of light illuminated the surroundings. 
It was difficult to hold Raju on his feet, as he had a tendency 
to flop down. They held him as if he were a baby. Raju opened 
his eyes, looked about, and said, "Velan, it's raining in the 
hills. I can feel it coming up under my feet, up my legs — " He 
sagged down. 



220 



BOSTON PUBLIC LIBRARY 



9999 03869 240 4 






Gi idfiestown Branch Library 

179 Main Street 

Ohariestov/n. MA 02129 



savlord 



Rajii's first stop after his release from prison is the barber's 
shr! * Tiien he decides to take refuge in an abandoned temple. 

Raju used to be India's most corrupt tourist guide - but now a 

peasant mistakes him for a holy man. Gradually, almost 

grudgingly, he begins to play the part. He succeeds so well that 

God himself intervenes to put Raju's new holiness to the test. 

The Guide is a superbly entertaining novel in which fluent 

dialogue and eloquent prose brilliantly complement the gentle, 

powerful irony so characteristic of Narayan's writing. 

'Since the death of Evelyn Waugh, Narayan is the novelist I most 
admire in the English language' - Graham Greene 

'One of the most charming masters of twentieth-century fiction' 

-Scotsman 

A brilliant accomplishment' - The New York Times 
Book Review 

'Narayan's fictions have shown India to the world in a way no 
other writing has' - Observer 

Cover illustration by Christopher Brown 



® 



A PENGUIN BOOK 

Fiction 

UK £3.99 

AUST. $12.95 
(recommended) 

N.Z. $14.99 

(incl. GST) 

CAN. $9.95 

U.S.A. $6.95 



ISBN 0-U-011926-A 




9 780U0"119268 



90000 
